COMPLETE AND UNABRIDGED 


THREE 


KINGDOMS 


. Di 
Attributed to 


LUO GUANZHONG 


Translated from the Chinese 
‘ Notes and an Afterword by 


MOSS ROBERTS 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 1: 
Three Heroes Swear Brotherhood In The Peach Garden; 
One Victory Shatters The Rebels In Battlegrounds. 


Domains under heaven, after a long period of division, tends to unite; after a 
long period of union, tends to divide. This has been so since antiquity. When the 
rule of the Zhou Dynasty weakened, seven contending kingdoms sprang up, 
warring one with another until the kingdom of Qin prevailed and possessed the 
empire. But when Qin's destiny had been fulfilled, arose two opposing kingdoms, 
Chu and Han, to fight for the mastery. And Han was the victor. 


The rise of the fortunes of Han began when Liu Bang the Supreme Ancestor 
slew a white serpent to raise the banners of uprising, which only ended when the 
whole empire belonged to Han (BC 202). This magnificent heritage was handed 
down in successive Han emperors for two hundred years, till the rebellion of Wang 
Mang caused a disruption. But soon Liu Xiu the Latter Han Founder restored the 
empire, and Han emperors continued their rule for another two hundred years till 
the days of Emperor Xian, which were doomed to see the beginning of the empire's 
division into three parts, known to history as The Three Kingdoms. 


But the descent into misrule hastened in the reigns of the two predecessors of 
Emperor Xian-~-Emperors Huan and Ling-~-who sat in the Dragon Throne about 
the middle of the second century. 


Emperor Huan paid no heed to the good people of his court, but gave his 
confidence to the Palace eunuchs. He lived and died, leaving the scepter to 
Emperor Ling, whose advisers were Regent Marshal Dou Wu and Imperial 
Guardian Chen Fan. Dou Wu and Chen Fan, disgusted with the abuses of the 
eunuchs in the affairs of the state, plotted the destruction for the power-abusing 
eunuchs. But Chief Eunuch Cao Jie was not to be disposed of easily. The plot 
leaked out, and the honest Dou Wu and Chen Fan were put to death, leaving the 
eunuchs stronger than before. 


It fell upon the day of full moon of the fourth month, the second year, in the era of 
Established Calm (AD 169), that Emperor Ling went in state to the Hall of Virtue. As 
he drew near the throne, a rushing whirlwind arose in the corner of the hall and, lo! 
from the roof beams floated down a monstrous black serpent that coiled itself up on 
the very seat of majesty. The Emperor fell in a swoon. Those nearest him hastily 
raised and bore him to his palace while the courtiers scattered and fled. The 
serpent disappeared. 


But there followed a terrific tempest, thunder, hail, and torrents of rain, lasting till 
midnight and working havoc on all sides. Two years later the earth quaked in 
Capital Luoyang, while along the coast a huge tidal wave rushed in which, in its 
recoil, swept away all the dwellers by the sea. Another evil omen was recorded ten 


years later, when the reign title was changed to Radiant Harmony (AD 179): certain 
hens suddenly crowed. At the new moon of the sixth month, a long wreath of murky 
cloud wound its way into the Hall of Virtue, while in the following month a rainbow 
was seen in the Dragon Chamber. Away from the capital, a part of the Five 
Mountains collapsed, leaving a mighty rift in the flank. 


Such were some of various omens. Emperor Ling, greatly moved by these signs 
of the displeasure of Heaven, issued an edict asking his ministers for an 
explanation of the calamities and marvels. A court counselor, Cai Yong, replied 
bluntly: "Falling rainbows and changes of fowls' sexes are brought about by the 
interference of empresses and eunuchs in state affairs." 


The Emperor read this memorial with deep sighs, and Chief Eunuch Cao Jie, 
from his place behind the throne, anxiously noted these signs of grief. An 
opportunity offering, Cao Jie informed his fellows, and a charge was trumped up 
against Cai Yong, who was driven from the court and forced to retire to his country 
house. With this victory the eunuchs grew bolder. Ten of them, rivals in wickedness 
and associates in evil deeds, formed a powerful party known as the Ten Regular 
Attendants-~-Zhang Rang, Zhao Zhong, Cheng Kuang, Duan Gui, Feng Xu, Guo 
Sheng, Hou Lan, Jian Shuo, Cao Jie, and Xia Yun. 


One of them, Zhang Rang, won such influence that he became the Emperor's 
most honored and trusted adviser. The Emperor even called him "Foster Father." 
So the corrupt state administration went quickly from bad to worse, till the country 
was ripe for rebellion and buzzed with brigandage. 


At this time in the county of Julu was a certain Zhang family, of whom three 
brothers bore the name of Zhang Jue, Zhang Bao, and Zhang Liang, respectively. 
The eldest Zhang Jue was an unclassed graduate, who devoted himself to 
medicine. One day, while culling simples in the woods, Zhang Jue met a venerable 
old gentleman with very bright, emerald eyes and fresh complexion, who walked 
with an oak-wood staff. The old man beckoned Zhang Jue into a cave and there 
gave him three volumes of the "Book of Heaven." 


"This book," said the old gentleman, "is the Way of Peace. With the aid of these 
volumes, you can convert the world and rescue humankind. But you must be 
single-minded, or, rest assured, you will greatly suffer." 


With a humble obeisance, Zhang Jue took the book and asked the name of his 
benefactor. 


"lam Saint Hermit of the Southern Land," was the reply, as the old gentleman 
disappeared in thin air. 


Zhang Jue studied the wonderful book eagerly and strove day and night to 
reduce its precepts to practice. Before long, he could summon the winds and 


command the rain, and he became known as the Mystic of the Way of Peace. 


In the first month of the first year of Central Stability (AD 184), there was a terrible 
pestilence that ran throughout the land, whereupon Zhang Jue distributed charmed 
remedies to the afflicted. The godly medicines brought big successes, and soon he 
gained the tittle of the Wise and Worthy Master. He began to have a following of 
disciples whom he initiated into the mysteries and sent abroad throughout all the 
land. They, like their master, could write charms and recite formulas, and their fame 
increased his following. 


Zhang Jue began to organize his disciples. He established thirty-six circuits, the 
larger with ten thousand or more members, the smaller with about half that number. 
Each circuit had its chief who took the military title of General. They talked wildly of 
the death of the blue heaven and the setting up of the golden one; they said a new 
cycle was beginning and would bring universal good fortune to all members; and 
they persuaded people to chalk the symbols for the first year of the new cycle on 
the main door of their dwellings. 


With the growth of the number of his supporters grew also the ambition of Zhang 
Jue. The Wise and Worthy Master dreamed of empire. One of his partisans, Ma 
Yuanyi, was sent bearing gifts to gain the support of the eunuchs within the Palace. 
To his brothers Zhang Jue said, "For schemes like ours always the most difficult 
part is to gain the popular favor. But that is already ours. Such an opportunity must 
not pass." 


And they began to prepare. Many yellow flags and banners were made, and a 
day was chosen for the uprising. Then Zhang Jue wrote letters to Eunuch Feng Xu 
and sent them by one of his followers, Tang Zhou, who alas! betrayed his trust and 
reported the plot to the court. The Emperor summoned the trusty Regent Marshal 
He Jin and bade him look to the issue. Ma Yuanyi was at once taken and 
beheaded. Feng Xu and many others were cast into prison. 


The plot having thus become known, the Zhang brothers were forced at once to 
take the field. They took up grandiose titles: Zhang Jue the Lord of Heaven, Zhang 
Bao the Lord of Earth, and Zhang Liang the Lord of Human. And in these names 
they put forth this manifesto: 


"The good fortune of the Han is exhausted, and the Wise and Worthy Man has 
appeared. Discern the will of Heaven, O ye people, and walk in the way of 
righteousness, whereby alone ye may attain to peace." 


Support was not lacking. On every side people bound their heads with yellow 
scarves and joined the army of the rebel Zhang Jue, so that soon his strength was 
nearly half a million strong, and the official troops melted away at a whisper of his 
coming. 


Regent Marshal and Guardian of the Throne, He Jin, memorialized for general 
preparations against the Yellow Scarves, and an edict called upon every one to 
fight against the rebels. In the meantime, three Imperial Commanders-~-Lu Zhi, 
Huangfu Song, and Zhu Jun-~-marched against them in three directions with 
veteran soldiers. 


Meanwhile Zhang Jue led his army into Youzhou, the northeastern region of the 
empire. The Imperial Protector of Youzhou was Liu Yan, a scion of the Imperial 
House. Learning of the approach of the rebels, Liu Yan called in Commander Zhou 
Jing to consult over the position. 


Zhou Jing said, "They are many and we few. We must enlist more troops to 
oppose them." 


Liu Yan agreed and he put out notices calling for volunteers to serve against the 
rebels. One of these notices was posted up in the county of Zhuo, where lived one 
man of high spirit. 


This man was no mere bookish scholar, nor found he any pleasure in study. But 
he was liberal and amiable, albeit a man of few words, hiding all feeling under a 
calm exterior. He had always cherished a yearning for high enterprise and had 
cultivated the friendship of humans of mark. He was tall of stature. His ears were 
long, the lobes touching his shoulders, and his hands hung down below his knees. 
His eyes were very big and prominent so that he could see backward past his ears. 
His complexion was as clear as jade, and he had rich red lips. 


He was a descendant of Prince Faubus of Zhongshan whose father was the 
Emperor Myers, the occupant of the Dragon Throne a century and a half BC. His 
name was Liu Bei. Many years before, one of his forbears had been the governor 
of that very county, but had lost his rank for remissness in ceremonial offerings. 
However, that branch of the family had remained on in the place, gradually 
becoming poorer and poorer as the years rolled on. His father Liu Hong had been 
a scholar and a virtuous official but died young. The widow and orphan were left 
alone, and Liu Bei as a lad won a reputation for filial piety. 


At this time the family had sunk deep in poverty, and Liu Bei gained his living by 
selling straw sandals and weaving grass mats. The family home was in a village 
near the chief city of Zhuo. Near the house stood a huge mulberry tree, and seen 
from afar its curved profile resembled the canopy of a wagon. Noting the luxuriance 
of its foliage, a soothsayer had predicted that one day a man of distinction would 
come forth from the family. As a child, Liu Bei played with the other village children 
beneath this tree, and he would climb up into it, saying, "| am the Son of Heaven, 
and this is my chariot ." His uncle, Liu Yuanqi, recognized that Liu Bei was no 
ordinary boy and saw to it that the family did not come to actual want. 


When Liu Bei was fifteen, his mother sent him traveling for his education. For a 


time he served Zheng Xuan and Lu Zhi as masters. And he became great friends 
with Gongsun Zan. 


Liu Bei was twenty-eight when the outbreak of the Yellow Scarves called for 
soldiers. The sight of the notice saddened him, and he sighed as he read it. 
Suddenly a rasping voice behind him cried, "Sir, why sigh if you do nothing to help 
your country?" 


Turning quickly he saw standing there a man about his own height, with a bullet 
head like a leopard's, large eyes, a swallow pointed chin, and whiskers like a 
tiger's. He spoke in a loud bass voice and looked as irresistible as a dashing horse. 
At once Liu Bei saw he was no ordinary man and asked who he was. 


"Zhang Fei is my name," replied the stranger. "I live near here where | have a 
farm; and | am a wine seller and a butcher as well; and | like to become acquainted 
with worthy humans. Your sighs as you read the notice drew me toward you." 


Liu Bei replied, "| am of the Imperial Family, Liu Bei is my name. And | wish | 
could destroy these Yellow Scarves and restore peace to the land, but alas! | am 
helpless." 


"| have the means," said Zhang Fei. "Suppose you and | raised some troops and 
tried what we could do." 


This was happy news for Liu Bei, and the two betook themselves to the village 
inn to talk over the project. As they were drinking, a huge, tall fellow appeared 
pushing a hand-cart along the road. At the threshold he halted and entered the inn 
to rest awhile and he called for wine. 


"And be quick," added he, "for | am in haste to get into the town and offer myself 
for the army." 


Liu Bei looked over the newcomer, item by item, and he noted the man had a 
huge frame, a long beard, a vivid face like an apple, and deep red lips. He had 
eyes like a phoenix's and fine bushy eyebrows like silkworms. His whole 
appearance was dignified and awe-inspiring. Presently, Liu Bei crossed over, sat 
down beside him and asked his name. 


"lam Guan Yu," replied he. "| am a native of the east side of the river, but | have 
been a fugitive on the waters for some five years, because | slew a ruffian who, 
since he was powertul, was a bully. | have come to join the army here." 


Then Liu Bei told Guan Yu his own intentions, and all three went away to Zhang 
Fei's farm where they could talk over the grand project. 


Said Zhang Fei, "The peach trees in the orchard behind the house are just in full 


flower. Tomorrow we will institute a sacrifice there and solemnly declare our 
intention before Heaven and Earth. And we three will swear brotherhood and unity 
of aims and sentiments; thus will we enter upon our great task." 


Both Liu Bei and Guan Yu gladly agreed. 


All three being of one mind, next day they prepared the sacrifices, a black ox, a 
white horse, and wine for libation. Beneath the smoke of the incense burning on 
the altar, they bowed their heads and recited this oath: 


"We three-~-Liu Bei, Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei-~-though of different families, 
swear brotherhood, and promise mutual help to one end. We will rescue each 
other in difficulty; we will aid each other in danger. We swear to serve the state and 
save the people. We ask not the same day of birth, but we seek to die together. May 
Heaven, the all-ruling, and Earth, the all-producing, read our hearts; and if we turn 
aside from righteousness or forget kindliness, may Heaven and Human smite us!" 


They rose from their knees. The two others bowed before Liu Bei as their elder 
brother, and Zhang Fei was to be the youngest of the trio. This solemn ceremony 
performed, they slew other oxen and made a feast to which they invited the 
villagers. Three hundred joined them, and all feasted and drank deep in the Peach 
Garden. 


The next day weapons were mustered. But there were no horses to ride. This 
was a real grief, but soon they were cheered by the arrival of two horse dealers 
with a drove of horses. 


"Thus does Heaven help us," said Liu Bei. 


And the three brothers went forth to welcome the merchants. They were Zhang 
Shiping and Su Shuang from Zhongshan. They went northwards every year to buy 
horses. They were now on their way home because of the Yellow Scarves. The 
brothers invited them to the farm, where wine was served before them. Then Liu 
Bei told them of the plan to strive for tranquillity. Zhang Shiping and Su Shuang 
were glad and at once gave the brothers fifty good steeds, and beside, five 
hundred ounces of gold and silver and one thousand five hundred pounds of steel 
fit for the forging of weapons. 


The brothers expressed their gratitude, and the merchants took their leave. Then 
blacksmiths were summoned to forge weapons. For Liu Bei they made a pair of 
ancient swords; for Guan Yu they fashioned a long-handled, curve blade called 
Green-Dragon Saber, which weighed a full one hundred twenty pounds; and for 
Zhang Fei they created a ten-foot spear called Octane-Serpent Halberd. Each too 
had a helmet and full armor. 


When weapons were ready, the troop, now five hundred strong, marched to 


Commander Zhou Jing, who presented them to Imperial Protector Liu Yan. When 
the ceremony of introduction was over, Liu Bei declared his ancestry, and Liu Yan 
at once accorded him the esteem due to a relation. 


Before many days it was announced that the rebellion had actually broken out, 
and a Yellow Scarves chieftain, Cheng Yuanzhi, had invaded the region with a 
body of fifty thousand rebels. Liu Yan bade Zhou Jing and the three brothers to go 
out to oppose them with the five hundred troops. Liu Bei joyfully undertook to lead 
the van and marched to the foot of the Daxing Hills where they saw the rebels. The 
rebels wore their hair flying about their shoulders, and their foreheads were bound 
with yellow scarves. 


When the two armies had been drawn up opposite each other, Liu Bei rode to 
the front, Guan Yu to his left, Zhang Fei to his right. Flourishing his whip, Liu Bei 
began to hurl reproaches at the rebels, crying, "O malcontents! Why not dismount 
and be bound?" 


Their leader Cheng Yuanzhi, full of rage, sent out one general, Deng Mao, to 
begin the battle. At once rode forward Zhang Fei, his octane-serpent halberd 
poised to strike. One thrust and Deng Mao rolled off his horse, pierced through the 
heart. At this Cheng Yuanzhi himself whipped up his steed and rode forth with 
sword raised ready to slay Zhang Fei. But Guan Yu swung up his ponderous 
green-dragon saber and rode at Cheng Yuanzhi. At the sight fear seized upon 
Cheng Yuanzhi, and before he could defend himself, the great saber fell, cutting 
him in halves. 


Two heroes new to war's alarms, 
Ride boldly forth to try their arms. 
Their doughty deeds three kingdoms tell, 
And poets sing how these befell. 


Their leader fallen, the rebels threw away their weapons and fled. The official 
soldiers dashed in among them. Many thousands surrendered and the victory was 
complete. Thus this part of the rebellion was broken up. 


On their return, Liu Yan personally met them and distributed rewards. But the 
next day, letters came from Imperial Protector Gong Jing of Qingzhou saying that 
the rebels were laying siege to the chief city and it was near falling. Help was 
needed quickly. 


"| will go," said Liu Bei as soon as he heard the news. 


And he set out at once with his own soldiers, reinforced by a body of five 
thousand under Zhou Jing. The rebels, seeing help coming, at once attacked most 


fiercely. The relieving force being comparatively small could not prevail and retired 
some ten miles, where they made a camp. 


"They are many and we but few," said Liu Bei to his brothers. "We can only beat 
them by superior strategy." 


So they prepared an ambush. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, each with a goodly party, 
went behind the hills, right and left, and there hid. When the gongs beat they were 
to move out to support the main army. 


These preparations made, the drums rolled noisily for Liu Bei to advance. The 
rebels also came forward. But Liu Bei suddenly retired. Thinking this was their 
chance, the rebels pressed forward and were led over the hills. Then suddenly the 
gongs sounded for the ambush. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei poured out from right and 
left as Liu Bei faced around to meet the rebels. Under three-side attack, the rebels 
lost heavily and fled to the walls of Qingzhou City. But Imperial Protector Gong Jing 
led out an armed body to attack them, and the rebels were entirely defeated and 
many slain. Qingzhou was no longer in danger. 


Though fierce as tigers soldiers be, 
Battle are won by strategy. 

A hero comes; he gains renown, 
Already destined for a crown. 


After the celebrations in honor of victory were over, Commander Zhou Jing 
proposed to return to Youzhou. But Liu Bei said, "We are informed that Imperial 
Commander Lu Zhi has been struggling with a horde of rebels led by Zhang Jue at 
Guangzong. Lu Zhi was once my teacher, and | want to go to help him." 


So Liu Bei and Zhou Jing separated, and the three brothers with their troops 
made their way of Guangzong. They found Lu Zhi's camp, were admitted to his 
presence, and declared the reason of their coming. The Commander received 
them with great joy, and they remained with him while he made his plans. 


At that time Zhang Jue's one hundred fifty thousand troops and Lu Zhi's fifty 
thousand troops were facing each other. Neither had had any success. 


Lu Zhi said to Liu Bei, "| am able to surround these rebels here. But the other two 
brothers, Zhang Bao and Zhang Liang, are strongly entrenched opposite Huangfu 
Song and Zhu Jun at Yingchuan. | will give you a thousand more troops, and with 
these you can go to find out what is happening, and we can then settle the moment 
for concerted attack." 


So Liu Bei set off and marched as quickly as possible to Yingchuan. At that time 


the imperial troops were attacking with success, and the rebels had retired upon 
Changshe. They had encamped among the thick grass. Seeing this, Huangfu Song 
said to Zhu Jun, "The rebels are camping in the field. We can attack them by fire." 


So the Imperial Commanders bade every man cut a bundle of dry grass and laid 
an ambush. That night the wind blew a gale, and at the second watch they started a 
blaze. At the same time Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun's troops attacked the rebels 
and set their camp on fire. The flames rose to the very heaven. The rebels were 
thrown into great confusion. There was no time to saddle horses or don armor; they 
fled in all directions. 


The battle continued until dawn. Zhang Liang and Zhang Bao, with a group of 
flying rebels, found a way of escape. But suddenly a troop of soldiers with crimson 
banners appeared to oppose them. Their leader was a man of medium stature with 
small eyes and a long beard. He was Cao Cao, a Beijuo man, holding the rank of 
General of the Flying Cavalry. His father was Cao Song, but he was not really a 
Cao. Cao Song had been born to the Xiahou family, but he had been brought up by 
Eunuch Cao Teng and had taken this family name. 


As a young man Cao Cao had been fond of hunting and delighted in songs and 
dancing. He was resourceful and full of guile. An uncle, seeing the young fellow so 
unsteady, used to get angry with him and told his father of his misdeeds. His father 
remonstrated with him. 


But Cao Cao made equal to the occasion. One day, seeing his uncle coming, he 
fell to the ground in a pretended fit. The uncle alarmed ran to tell his father, who 
came, and there was the youth in most perfect health. 


"But your uncle said you were in a fit; are you better?" said his father. 


"| have never suffered from fits or any such illness," said Cao Cao. "But | have 
lost my uncle's affection, and he has deceived you." 


Thereafter, whatever the uncle might say of his faults, his father paid no heed. 
So the young man grew up licentious and uncontrolled. 


A man of the time named Qiao Xuan said to Cao Cao, "Rebellion is at hand, and 
only a man of the greatest ability can succeed in restoring tranquillity. That man is 
yourself." 


And Ho Yo of Nanyang said of him, "The dynasty of Han is about to fall. He who 
can restore peace is this man and only he." 


Cao Cao went to inquire his future of a wise man of Runan named Xu Shao. 


"What manner of man am |?" asked Cao Cao. 


The seer made no reply, and again and again Cao Cao pressed the question. 


Then Xu Shao replied, "In peace you are an able subject; in chaos you area 
crafty hero!" 


Cao Cao greatly rejoiced to hear this. 


Cao Cao graduated at twenty and earned a reputation of piety and integrity. He 
began his career in a county near Capital Luoyang. In the four gates of the city he 
ruled, he hung up clubs of various sorts, and he would punish any breach of the 
law whatever the rank of the offender. Now an uncle of Eunuch Jian Shuo was 
found one night in the streets with a sword and was arrested. In due course he was 
beaten. Thereafter no one dared to offend again, and Cao Cao's name became 
heard. Soon he became a magistrate of Dungiu. 


At the outbreak of the Yellow Scarves, Cao Cao held the rank of General and 
was given command of five thousand horse and foot to help fight at Yingchuan. He 
just happened to fall in with the newly defeated rebels whom he cut to pieces. 
Thousands were slain and endless banners and drums and horses were captured, 
together with huge sums of money. However Zhang Bao and Zhang Liang got 
away; and after an interview with Huangfu Song, Cao Cao went in pursuit of them. 


Meanwhile Liu Bei and his brothers were hastening toward Yingchuan, when 
they heard the din of battle and saw flames rising high toward the sky. However, 
they arrived too late for the fighting. They saw Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun to whom 
they told the intentions of Lu Zhi. 


"The rebel power is quite broken here," said the commanders, "but they will 
surely make for Guangzong to join Zhang Jue. You can do nothing better than 
hasten back." 


The three brothers thus retraced their steps. Half way along the road they met a 
party of soldiers escorting a prisoner in a cage-cart. When they drew near, they saw 
the prisoner was no other than the man they were going to help. Hastily 
dismounting, Liu Bei asked what had happened. 


Lu Zhi explained, "| had surrounded the rebels and was on the point of 
smashing them, when Zhang Jue employed some of his supernatural powers and 
prevented my victory. The court sent down Eunuch Zhuo Feng to inquire into my 
failure, and that official demanded a bribe. | told him how hard pressed we were 
and asked him where, in the circumstances, | could find a gift for him. He went 
away in wrath and reported that | was hiding behind my ramparts and would not 
give battle and that | disheartened my army. So | was superseded by Dong Zhuo, 
and | have to go to the capital to answer the charge." 


This story put Zhang Fei into a rage. He was for slaying the escort and setting 
free Lu Zhi. But Liu Bei checked him. 


"The government will take the proper course," said Liu Bei. "You must not act 
hastily!" 


And the escort and the three brothers went two ways. 


It was useless to continue on that road to Guangzong, so Guan Yu proposed to 
go back to Zhuo, and they retook the road. Two days later they heard the thunder of 
battle behind some hills. Hastening to the top, they beheld the government soldiers 
suffering great loss, and they saw the countryside was full of Yellow Scarves. On 
the rebels' banners were the words "Zhang Jue the Lord of Heaven" written large. 


"We will attack this Zhang Jue!" said Liu Bei to his brothers, and they galloped 
out to join in the battle. 


Zhang Jue had worsted Dong Zhuo and was following up his advantage. He 
was in hot pursuit when the three brothers dashed into his army, threw his ranks 
into confusion, and drove him back fifteen miles. Then the brothers returned with 
the rescued general to his camp. 


"What offices have you?" asked Dong Zhuo, when he had leisure to speak to the 
brothers. 


"None," replied they. 


And Dong Zhuo treated them with disrespect. Liu Bei retired calmly, but Zhang 
Fei was furious. 


"We have just rescued this menial in a bloody fight," cried Zhang Fei, "and now 
he is rude to us! Nothing but his death can slake my anger." 


Zhang Fei stamped toward Dong Zhuo's tent, holding firmly a sharp sword. 


As it was in olden time so it is today, 
The simple wight may merit well, 
Officialdom holds sway; 
Zhang Fei, the blunt and hasty, 
Where can you find his peer? 
But slaying the ungrateful would 
Mean many deaths a year. 


Dong Zhuo's fate will be unrolled in later chapters. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 2: 
Zhang Fei Whips The Government Officer; 
He Jin Plots To Kill The Eunuchs. 


Dong Zhuo was born in the far northwest at Lintao in Longxi. As the governor of 
Hedong, Dong Zhuo himself was arrogant and overbearing. But the day he had 
treated Liu Bei with contumely had been his last, had not Liu Bei and Guan Yu 
restrained their wrathful brother Zhang Fei. 


"Remember he has the government commission;" said Liu Bei, "who are we to 
judge and slay?" 


"It is bitter to take orders from such a wretch; | would rather slay him! You may 
stay here if you wish to, but | will seek some other place," said Zhang Fei. 


"We three are one in life and in death; there is no parting for us. We will all go 
hence." 


So spoke Liu Bei, and his brother was satisfied. Wherefore all three set out and 
lost no time in traveling until they came to Zhu Jun, who received them well and 
accepted their aid in attacking Zhang Bao. At this time Cao Cao had joined himself 
to Huangfu Song, and they were trying to destroy Zhang Liang, and there was a 
great battle at Quyang. 


Zhang Bao was commanding some eighty thousand troops. The rebel had led 
his army to a strong position in the rear of the hills. An attack being decided upon, 
Liu Bei was the van leader. On the rebel side a general of Zhang Bao, Gao Sheng, 
came out to offer battle. Liu Bei sent Zhang Fei to smite Gao Sheng. Out rode 


Zhang Fei at full speed, his spear ready set. After a few bouts Zhang Fei wounded 
Gao Sheng, who was unhorsed. At this Liu Bei signaled the main army to advance. 
Then Zhang Bao, while still mounted, loosened his hair, grasped his sword, and 
uttered his incantations. Thereupon began the wind to howl and the thunder to roll, 
while a dense black cloud from the heavens settled upon the field. And therein 
seemed to be horsemen and footmen innumerable, who swept to attack the 
imperial troops. Fear came upon them, and Liu Bei led off his troops, but they were 
in disorder and returned defeated. 


Zhu Jun and Liu Bei considered the matter. 


"Zhang Bao uses magic," said Zhu Jun. "Tomorrow, then, will | prepare counter 
magic in the shape of the blood of slaughtered swine and goats and dogs. This 
blood shall be sprinkled upon their hosts from the precipices above by soldiers in 
ambush. Thus shall we be able to break the power of their shamanic art." 


So it was done. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei took each a thousand troops and hid 
them on the high cliffs behind the hills, and they had a plentiful supply of the blood 
of swine and goats and dogs and all manners of filthy things. And so next day, 
when the rebels with fluttering banners and rolling drums came out to challenge, 
Liu Bei rode forth to meet them. At the same moment that the armies met, again 
Zhang Bao began his magic and again the elements began to struggle together. 
Sand flew in clouds, pebbles were swept along the ground, black masses of vapor 
filled the sky, and rolling masses of foot and horse descended from on high. Liu Bei 
turned, as before, to flee and the rebels rushed on. But as they pressed through the 
hills, the trumpets blared, and the hidden soldiers exploded bombs, threw down 
filth and spattered blood. The masses of soldiers and horses in the air fluttered to 
the earth as fragments of torn paper, the wind ceased to blow, the thunder 
subsided, the sand sank, and the pebbles lay still upon the ground. 


Zhang Bao quickly saw his magic had been countered and turned to retire. Then 
he was attacked on the flanks by Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, and in rear by Liu Bei 
and Zhu Jun. The rebels were routed. Liu Bei, seeing from afar the banner of 
"Zhang Bao The Lord of Earth," galloped toward it but only succeeded in wounding 
Zhang Bao with an arrow in the left arm. Wounded though he was, Zhang Bao got 
away into the city of Yangcheng, where he fortified himself and was besieged by 
Zhu Jun. 


Scouts, sent out to get news of Huangfu Song, reported: "Commander Huangfu 
Song had been very successful, and Dong Zhuo had suffered many reverses. 
Therefore the court put Huangfu Song in the latter's place. Zhang Jue had died 
before Huangfu Song's arrival. Zhang Liang had added his brother's army to his 
own, but no headway could be made against Huangfu Song, whose army gained 
seven successive victories. And Zhang Liang was slain at Quyang. Beside this, 
Zhang Jue's coffin was exhumed, the corpse beheaded, and the head, after 
exposure, was sent to Capital Luoyang. The common crowd had surrendered. For 


these services Huangfu Song was promoted to General of the Flying Cavalry and 
the Imperial Protector of Jizhou. 


"Huangfu Song did not forgotten his friends. His first act after he had attained to 
power was to memorialize the Throne concerning the case of Lu Zhi, who was then 
restored to his former rank for his meritorious conducts. Cao Cao also received 
advancement for his services and was preparing to go to Jinan to his new post." 


Hearing these things Zhu Jun pressed harder yet upon Yangcheng, and the 
approaching break-up of the rebellion became evident. Then one of Zhang Bao's 
officers, Yan Zheng, killed his leader and brought the head in token of submission. 
Thus rebellion in that part of the country was stamped out, and Zhu Jun made his 
report to the government. 


However, the embers of the Yellow Scarves still smoldered. Three other rebels, 
Zhao Hong, Han Zhong, and Sun Zhong, gathered some thirty thousand rebels and 
began to murder and rob and burn, calling themselves the avengers of Master 
Zhang Jue. 


The court commanded the successful Zhu Jun to lead his veteran and 
successful troops to destroy the rebels. He at once marched toward the city of 
Wancheng which the rebels were holding. When Zhu Jun arrived, Han Zhong went 
to oppose him. Zhu Jun sent Liu Bei and his brothers to attack the southwest corner 
of the city. Han Zhong at once led the best of his troops to defend the city. 
Meanwhile Zhu Jun himself led two thousand of armored horsemen to attack the 
opposite corner. The rebels, thinking the city being lost, abandoned the southwest 
and turned back into the city to help the defenders. Liu Bei pressed hotly in their 
rear, and they were utterly routed. They took refuge in the city which was then 
invested. When famine pressed upon the besieged, they sent a messenger to offer 
to surrender, but Zhu Jun refused the offer. 


Said Liu Bei to Zhu Jun, "Seeing that the founder of the Han Dynasty, Liu Bang 
the Supreme Ancestor, could welcome the submissive and receive the favorable, 
why reject these?" 


"The conditions are different," replied Zhu Jun. "In those old days disorder was 
universal and the people had no fixed lord. Wherefore submission was welcomed 
and support rewarded to encourage people to come over. Now the empire is 
united, and the Yellow Scarves are the only malcontents. To receive their surrender 
is not to encourage the good. To allow brigands, when successful, is to give way to 
every license, and to let them surrender when they fail is to encourage brigandage. 
Your plan is not a good one." 


Liu Bei replied, "Not to let brigands surrender is well. But the city is surrounded 
as by an iron barrel. If the rebels' request be refused, they will be desperate and 
fight to the death, and we can hardly withstood a myriad of such men. Moreover, in 


the city there are many times that number, all doomed to death. Let us withdraw 
from one corner and only attack the opposite. They will all assuredly flee and have 
no desire to fight. We shall take them." 


Zhu Jun saw that the advice was good and followed it. As predicted the rebels 
ran out, led by Han Zhong. The besiegers fell upon them as they fled, and Han 
Zhong was slain. The rebels scattered in all directions. But the other two rebel 
chieftains, Zhao Hong and Sun Zhong, came with large reinforcements, and as 
they appeared very strong, the imperial soldiers retired, and the new body of rebels 
reentered Wancheng. 


Zhu Jun encamped three miles from the city and prepared to attack. Just then 
there arrived a body of horse and foot from the east. At the lead was one general 
with a broad open face, a body as an alert tiger's, and a torso as a lofty bear's. His 
name was Sun Jian. He was a native of Fuchun in the old state of Wu, a 
descendant of the famous Sun Zi the Strategist. 


When he was seventeen, Sun Jian was with his father on the River Qiantang 
and saw a party of pirates, who had been plundering a merchant, dividing their 
booty on the river bank. 


"We can capture these," said he to his father. 


So, gripping his sword, he ran boldly up the bank and cried out to this side and 
that as if he was calling his men to come on. This made the pirates believe the 
soldiers were on them and they fled, leaving their booty behind them. He actually 
killed one of the pirates. In this way be became known and was recommended for 
office. 


Then, in collaboration with the local officials, he raised a band of one thousand 
and helped to quell the rebellion of one Xu Chang who called himself the Sun 
Emperor and had ten thousand supporters. The rebel's son Xu Shao was also slain 
with his father. For this Sun Jian was commended by Imperial Protector Zang Min in 
a memorial to the Throne, and he received further promotion to the post of 
magistrate of Yandu, then of Xuyi, and then of Xiapi. 


When the Yellow Scarves rebellion began, Sun Jian gathered together the 
youths of his village, some of the merchant class, got a troop of one thousand five 
hundred of veteran soldiers and took the field. Now he had reached the fighting 
area. 


Zhu Jun welcomed Sun Jian gladly and ordered him to attack the south gate of 
Wancheng. The north and the west gates were simultaneously attacked by Liu Bei 
and Zhu Jun, but the east gate was left free to give the rebels a chance of exit. Sun 
Jian was the first to mount the wall and cut down more than twenty rebels with his 
own sword. The rebels ran, but the leader Zhao Hong rode directly at Sun Jian with 


his spear ready to thrust. Sun Jian leaped down from the wall, snatched away the 
spear and with it knocked Zhao Hong from the horse. Then Sun Jian, mounting 
Zhao Hong's horse, rode hither and thither, slaying as he went. 


The rebels fled north. Meeting Liu Bei, they declined to fight and scattered. But 
Liu Bei drew his bow, fitted an arrow, and shot their leader Sun Zhong, who fell to 
the ground. The main army of Zhu Jun came up, and after tremendous slaughter, 
the rebels surrendered. Thus was peace brought to the ten counties about the 
Nanyang area. 


Zhu Jun returned to Capital Luoyang, was promoted to the General of the Flying 
Cavalry, and received the governorship of Henan. He did not forget those who had 
helped him to win victory. Thus he reported the merits of Liu Bei and Sun Jian to 
the Throne. 


Sun Jian, having influential friends and connections to support him, quickly got 
an appointment to a post of Commander of Changsha and went to assume the new 
office. But Liu Bei, in spite of Zhu Jun's memorial, waited in vain for preferment, and 
the three brothers became very sad. 


Walking along one day in the capital, Liu Bei met a court official, Zhang Jun, to 
whom he related his services and told his sorrows. Zhang Jun was much surprised 
at this neglect and one day at court spoke to the Emperor about it. 


Said he, "The Yellow Scarves rebelled because the eunuchs sold offices and 
bartered ranks. There was employment only for their friends, punishment only for 
their enemies. This led to rebellion. Wherefore it would be well to slay the Ten 
Eunuchs and expose their heads and proclaim what had been done throughout the 
whole empire. Then reward the worthy. Thereby the land would be wholly tranquil." 


But the eunuchs fiercely opposed this and said Zhang Jun was insulting the 
Emperor, and the Emperor bade the guards thrust Zhang Jun out. 


However, the eunuchs took counsel together and one said, "Surely some one 
who rendered some service against rebels resents being passed over." 


So they caused a list of unimportant people to be prepared for preferment by 
and by. Among them was Liu Bei, who received the post of magistrate of the county 
of Anxi, to which he proceeded without delay after disbanding his army and 
sending them home to their villages. He retained two dozens or so as escort. 


The three brothers reached Anxi, and soon the administration of the county was 
so reformed and the rule so wise that in a month there was no law-breaking. The 
three brothers lived in harmony, eating at the same table and sleeping on the same 
couch. But when Liu Bei was in public sessions or in company of others, Guan Yu 
and Zhang Fei would stand in attendance, were it even a whole day. 


Four months after their arrival, there came out a general order for the reduction 
of the number of military officers holding civil posts, and Liu Bei began to fear that 
he would be among those thrown out. In due course the inspecting official, Du Biao 
by name, arrived and was met at the boundary; but to the polite obeisance of Liu 
Bei, he made no return, save a wave of his whip as he sat on his horse. This made 
Guan Yu and Zhang Fei furious; but worse was to follow. 


When the inspector had arrived at his lodging, he took his seat on the dais, 
leaving Liu Bei standing below. After a long time he addressed Liu Bei. 


"Magistrate, what was your origin?" 


Liu Bei replied, "| am descended from Prince Faubus of Zhongshan. Since my 
first fight with the Yellow Scarves rebels at Zhuo County, | have been in some thirty 
battles, wherein | gained some trifling merit. My reward was this office." 


"You lie about your descent, and your statement of services is false," roared the 
inspector. "Now the court has ordered the reduction of your sort of low class and 
corrupt Officials." 


Liu Bei muttered to himself and withdrew. On his return to the magistracy, he 
took council with his secretaries. 


"This pompous attitude only means the inspector wants a bribe," said they. 


"| have never wronged the people to the value of a single coin; then where is a 
bribe to come from?" 


Next day the inspector had the minor officials before him and forced them to 
bear witness that their master had oppressed the people. Liu Bei time after time 
went to rebut this charge, but the doorkeepers drove him away and he could not 
enter. 


Now Zhang Fei had been all day drowning his sorrow in wine and had drunk far 
too much. Calling for his horse he rode out past the lodging of the inspector, and at 
the gate saw a small crowd of white-haired people weeping bitterly. He asked why. 


They said, "The inspector has compelled the underlings to bear false witness 
against our magistrate, with the desire to injure the virtuous Liu Bei. We came to 
beg mercy for him but are not permitted to enter. Moreover, we have been beaten 
by the doorkeepers." 


This provoked the irascible and half intoxicated Zhang Fei to fury. His eyes 
opened wide until they became circles; he ground his teeth; in a moment he was off 
his steed, had forced his way past the scared doorkeepers into the building, and 


was in the rear apartments. There he saw Imperial Inspector Du Biao sitting on high 
with the official underlings in bonds at his feet. 


"Oppressor of the people, robber!" cried Zhang Fei. "Do you know me?" 


But before the inspector could reply, Zhang Fei had had him by the hair and had 
dragged him down. Another moment he was outside and firmly lashed to the 
hitching post in front of the building. Then breaking off a switch from a willow tree, 
Zhang Fei gave his victim a severe thrashing, only staying his hand when the tenth 
switch was too short to strike with. 


Liu Bei was sitting alone, communing with his sorrow, when he heard a shouting 
before his door. He asked what the matter was. 


They told him, "General Zhang Fei had bound somebody to a post and was 
thrashing him." 


Hastily going outside, Liu Bei saw who the unhappy victim was and asked 
Zhang Fei the reason. 


"If we do not beat this sort of wretch to death, what may we expect?" said Zhang 
Fei. 


"Noble Sir, save me," cried the inspector. 


Now Liu Bei had always been kindly and gracious, wherefore he bade his 
brother release the officer and go his way. 


Then Guan Yu came up saying, "Brother, after your magnificent services you 
only got this petty post, and even here you have been insulted by this fellow. A 
thorn bush is no place for a phoenix. Let us slay this fellow, leave here, and go 
home till we can evolve a bigger scheme." 


Liu Bei contented himself with hanging the official seal about the inspector's 
neck, saying, "If | hear that you injure the people, | will assuredly kill you. | now 
spare your life, and | return to you the seal. We are going." 


The inspector went to the governor of Dingzhou and complained, and orders 
were issued for the arrest of the brothers, but they got away to Daizhou and sought 
refuge with Liu Hui, who sheltered them because of Liu Bei's noble birth. 


By this time the Ten Regular Attendants had everything in their hands, and they 
put to death all who did not stand in with them. From every officer who had helped 
to put down the rebels they demanded presents; and if these were not forthcoming, 
he was removed from office. Imperial Commanders Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun 
both fell victims to these intrigues and were deprived from offices, while on the 


other hand the eunuchs received the highest honors. Thirteen eunuchs were 
ennobled, including Zhao Zhong who was added to the rank of General of the 
Flying Cavalry. The government grew worse and worse, and every one was 
irritated. 


Rebellions broke out in Changsha led by Ou Xing, and in Yuyang led by Zhang 
Ju and Zhang Chun . Memorials were sent up in number as snow flakes in winter, 
but the Ten suppressed them all. One day the Emperor was at a feast in one of the 
gardens with the Ten, when High Counselor Liu Tao suddenly appeared showing 
very great distress. The Emperor asked what the matter was. 


"Sire, how can you be feasting with these when the empire is at the last gasp?" 
said Liu Tao. 


"All is well," said the Emperor. "Where is anything wrong?" 


Said Liu Tao, "Robbers swarm on all sides and plunder the cities. And all is the 
fault of the Ten Eunuchs who sell offices and injure the people, oppress loyal 
officials and deceive their superiors. All virtuous ones have left the services, and 
misfortune is before our very eyes." 


At this the eunuchs pulled off their hats and threw themselves at their master's 
feet. 


"If Minister Liu Tao disapproves of us," they said, "we are in danger. We pray that 
our lives be spared and we may go to our farms. We yield our property to help 
defray military expenses." 


And they wept bitterly. The Emperor turned angrily to Liu Tao, saying, "You also 
have servants; why can't you bear with mine?" 


And thereupon the Emperor called to the guards to eject Liu Tao and put him to 
death. 


Liu Tao cried aloud, "My death matters nothing. The pity is that Han Dynasty, 
after four centuries of reign, is falling fast." 


The guards hustled him away and were just about to carry out the Emperor's 
order when a minister stopped them, shouting, "Strike not! Wait till | have spoken 
with His Majesty." 


It was the Minister of the Interior, Chen Dan. He went in to the Emperor, to whom 
he said, "For what fault is Counselor Liu Tao to be put to death?" 


"He has vilified my servants; and has insulted me," said the Emperor. 


"All the empire would eat the flesh of the eunuchs if they could, and yet, Sire, you 
respect them as if they were your parents. They have no merit, but they are created 
nobles. Moreover, Feng Xu was in league with the Yellow Scarves. Unless Your 
Majesty looks to it, the state will crumble!" 


"There was no proof against Feng Xu," replied the Emperor. "About the Ten 
Eunuchs, are there none faithful among them?" 


Chen Dan beat his forehead on the steps of the throne and did not desist from 
remonstrance. Then the Emperor grew angry and commanded his removal and 
imprisonment with Liu Tao. That night Liu Tao and Chen Dan were murdered. 


Then the eunuchs sent a forged edict to Sun Jian making him Governor of 
Changsha, with orders to suppress the rebellion of Ou Xing. In less than two 
months Sun Jian reported the county all tranquil. For this he was created Lord of 
Wucheng. 


Further, Liu Yu was made Imperial Protector of Youzhou to move against 
Yuyang and suppress Zhang Ju and Zhang Chun. Liu Hui of Daizhou 
recommended Liu Bei to Liu Yu. Liu Yu welcomed Liu Bei and gave him rank of 
commander and sent him against the rebels. He fought with and worsted them and 
entirely broke their spirit. Zhang Chun was cruel, and his leaders turned against 
him. One of his officers then slew him and brought in his head, after which the 
others submitted. The other leader Zhang Ju saw that all was lost and killed 
himself. 


Yuyang being now tranquil, Liu Bei's services were reported to the Throne, and 
he received full pardon for the insult to the imperial inspector. He also became 
Magistrate Deputy of Micheng. Then Gongsun Zan praised Liu Bei's former 
services, and he was promoted to Magistrate of Pingyuan. This place was very 
prosperous, and Liu Bei recovered something of his old manner before the days of 
adversity. Liu Yu also received preferment and was promoted to Grand 
Commander. 


In the summer of the six year of Central Stability (AD 189), Emperor Ling 
became seriously ill and summoned He Jin into the palace to arrange for the future. 
He Jin had sprung from a humble family of butchers, but his sister had become a 
concubine of rank and borne a son to the Emperor, named Bian Liu. After this she 
became Empress He, and He Jin became the powerful Imperial Guardian and 
Regent Marshal. 


The Emperor had also greatly loved a beautiful girl, Lady Wang, who had borne 
him a son named Liu Xian. Empress He had poisoned Lady Wang from jealousy, 
and the baby had been given into the care of Empress Dong, who was the mother 
of Emperor Ling. Lady Dong was the wife of Liu Chang, Lord of Jiedu. As time went 
on and the Emperor Huan had no son of his own, he adopted the son of Liu Chang, 


who succeeded as the Emperor Ling. After his accession, Emperor Ling had taken 
his own mother into the palace to live and had conferred upon her the title of 
Empress Dowager. 


Empress Dong had always tried to persuade her son to name Liu Xian as the 
Heir Apparent, and in fact the Emperor greatly loved the boy and was disposed to 
do as his mother desired. When he fell ill, one of the eunuchs, Jian Shuo, said, "If 
Liu Xian is to succeed, He Jin must be killed to prevent countermoves." 


The Emperor saw this too and commanded Imperial Guardian He Jin to come to 
him. 


But at the very gates of the palace, He Jin was warned of his danger by 
Commander Pan Yin who said, "This must be a trap of Jian Shuo to destroy you." 


He Jin rushed back to his quarters and called many of the ministers to his side, 
and they met to consider how to put the eunuchs to death. 


At this assembly a man spoke against the plot, "The influence of the eunuchs 
dates back half a century and has spread like a noxious weed in all directions. How 
can we hope to destroy it? Above all keep this plot secret or you will be 
exterminated." 


He Jin eyed down and saw General of Military Standards Cao Cao. He Jin was 
very angry at this speech and cried, "What do inferiors like you know of the ways of 
government?" 


And in the midst of the confusion Pan Yin came to say: "The Emperor is no more. 
The eunuchs have decided to keep the death a secret and forge a command to the 
Imperial Guardian to come into the palace to settle the succession. Meanwhile to 
prevent trouble they have inscribed the name of Liu Xian on the roll." 


And as Pan Yin finished speaking, the edict arrived. 


"The matter for the moment is to set up the rightful heir," said Cao Cao. "The 
other affairs can wait." 


"Who dares to join me in supporting the rightful heir-~-Prince Bian Liu?" asked 
He Jin, the Imperial Guardian. 


At once one stood forward saying, "Give me five thousand veterans, and we will 
break into the palace, set up the true heir, slay the eunuchs, and sweep clean the 
government. Then peace will come to the empire." 


The energetic speaker was Yuan Shao, son of the former Minister of the Interior 
Yuan Feng and nephew of Minister Yuan Wei. Yuan Shao then held the rank of 


Imperial Commander. 


He Jin mustered five thousand royal guards. Yuan Shao put on complete armor 
and took command. He Jin, supported by He Yu, Xun You, Zheng Tai, and more 
than thirty other ministers and high-rank officials, went into the palace; and in the 
hall where lay the coffin of the late Emperor they placed Bian Liu on the throne. 
After the ceremony was over and all had bowed before the new Emperor, Yuan 
Shao went in to arrest Eunuch Jian Shuo. Jian Shuo in terror fled into the palace 
garden and hid among the shrubs, where he was discovered and murdered by 
Guo Sheng, one of the Ten Eunuchs. The guards under Jian Shuo's command all 
surrendered. 


Yuan Shao said, "Their gangs have broken; the most opportune moment is now 
to slay all the eunuchs." 


But Zhang Rang and the eunuchs of the Ten scented the danger and rushed to 
see Empress He. 


They said, "The originator of the plan to injure your brother was Jian Shuo; only 
he was concerned and no other. Now the Imperial Guardian, on Yuan Shao's 
advice, wishes to slay every one of us. We implore your pity, O Your Majesty." 


"Fear not," said Empress He, whose son had just become Emperor, "I will protect 
you." 


She sent for her brother, and said, "You and | are of lowly origin, and we owe our 
good fortune to the eunuchs. The misguided Jian Shuo is now dead, and need you 
really put all the others to death as Yuan Shao advises?" 


And He Jin obeyed her wish. He explained to his party, saying, "The real 
offender, Jian Shuo, has met his fate, and his clan will be punished. But we need 
not exterminate the whole party nor injure his colleagues." 

"Slay them, root and branch," cried Yuan Shao, "or they will ruin you!" 


"| have decided;" said He Jin, coldly, "say no more." 


Within a few days He Jin became Chair of the Secretariat, and his associates 
received high offices. 


Now Empress Dong summoned the eunuch Zhang Rang and his party to a 
council. 


Said she, "It was | who first brought forward the sister of He Jin. Today her son is 
on the throne, and all the officials are her friends, and her influence is enormous. 
What can we do?" 


Zhang Rang replied, "Your Highness should administer the state from 'behind 
the veil.' create the late Emperor's son Liu Xian a prince; give your brother, the 
Imperial Uncle Dong Chong, a high rank, and place him over the army; and use us. 
That will do it." 


Empress Dong approved. Next day she held a court and issued an edict in the 
sense proposed. She made Liu Xian Prince of Chenliu and Dong Chong General 
of the Flying Cavalry, and she allowed the eunuchs again to participate state 
affairs. 


When Empress He saw this, she prepared a banquet to which she invited her 
rival Empress Dong. In the middle of the feast, when all were well warmed with 
wine, Empress He rose and offered a cup to her guest saying, "It is not fitting that 
we two should meddle in state affairs. In the beginning of the Han Dynasty, when 
Empress Lu laid hands upon the government, all her clans were put to death. We 
ought to remain content, immured in our palaces, and leave state affairs to the state 
officials. That would be well for the country, and | trust you will act thus." 


But Empress Dong only got angry, saying, "You poisoned Lady Wang out of 
jealousy. Now, relying upon the fact that your son sits on the throne and that your 
brother is powerful, you speak these wild words. | will command that your brother 
be beheaded, and that can be done as easily as | turn my hand." 


Empress He in her turn waxed wroth and said, "I tried to persuade you with fair 
words; why get so angry?" 


"You low born daughter of a butcher, what do you know of offices?" cried 
Empress Dong. 


And the quarrel waxed hot. 


The eunuchs persuaded the ladies to retire. But in the night Empress He 
summoned her brother into the palace and told him what had occurred. He went 
out and took counsel with the principal officers of state. Next morning a court was 
held and a memorial was presented, saying: 


"Empress Dong, being the foster mother of Liu Xian, Prince of Chenliu, a 
regional prince-~-only a collateral-~-cannot properly occupy any part of the Palace. 
She is to be removed into her original fief of Hejian and is to depart immediately." 


And while they sent an escort to remove Empress Dong, a strong guard was 
placed about the Imperial Uncle Dong Chong's dwelling. They took away his seal 
of office and he, knowing this was the end, killed himself in his private apartments. 
His dependents, who wailed his death, were driven off by the guards. 


The eunuchs Zhang Rang and Duan Gui, having lost their patroness, sent large 
gifts to He Jin's younger brother, He Miao, and his mother, Lady Wuyang, and thus 
got them to put in a good word to Empress He so as to gain her protection. And so 
they gained favor once more at court. 


In the sixth month of that year, the secret emissaries of He Jin poisoned Empress 
Dong in her residence in the country. Her remains were brought to the capital and 
buried in Wen Tombs. He Jin feigned illness and did not attend the funeral. 


Commander Yuan Shao went one day to see He Jin, saying, "The two eunuchs, 
Zhang Rang and Duan Gui, are spreading the report outside that you has caused 
the death of the late empress and is aiming at the throne. This is an excuse for you 
to destroy them. Do not spare them this time, or you will pay like Dou Wu and Chen 
Fan, who in the previous reign missed their chance because the secret had not 
been kept, and they paid by their own deaths. Now you and your brother have 
many commanders and officers behind, so that the destruction of the eunuchs can 
be but an ease. It is a heaven-sent opportunity. Delay no further!" 


But He Jin replied, "Let me think it over." 


He Jin's servants overheard the discussion and secretly informed the intended 
victims, who sent further gifts to the younger brother He Miao. Corrupted by these, 
he went in to speak with his sister Empress He and said, "The General is the chief 
support of the new Emperor, yet he is not gracious and merciful but thinks wholly of 
slaughter. If he slays the eunuchs without cause, it may bring about revolution." 


Soon after He Jin entered and told her of his design to put the eunuchs to death. 
She argued with him, "Those officials look after palace affairs and are old servants. 
To kill the old servants just after the death of their master would appear 
disrespectful to the dynasty's ancestral temple." 

And as He Jin was of a vacillating mind, he murmured assent and left her. 

"What about it?" said Yuan Shao on meeting him. 

"She will not consent; what can be done?" 


"Call up an army and slay them; it is imperative. Never mind her consent." 


"That is an excellent plan," said He Jin. And he sent orders all round to march 
soldiers to the capital. 


But Counselor Chen Lin objected, "Nay; do not act blindly. The proverb says 'To 
cover the eyes and snatch at swallows is to fool oneself.' If in so small a matter you 
cannot attain your wish with covered eyes, what of great affairs? Now by virtue of 
the imperial prestige and with the army under your hand you may do as you 


please. To use such enormous powers against the eunuchs would resemble 
lighting up a furnace to burn a hair. But act promptly; use your powers and smite at 
once, and all the empire will be with you. But to summon forces to the capital, to 
gather many bold persons into one spot, each with one's own schemes, is to turn 
our weapons against our own person, to place ourselves in the power of another. 
Nothing but failure can come of it, nothing but confusion." 


"The view of a mere book-worm," said He Jin with a smile. 


Then one of those about He Jin suddenly clapped his hands, laughing, "Solving 
this issue is as easy as turning over one's hand! Why so much talk?" 


The speaker was Cao Cao. 


Wouldst thou withdraw wicked people from thy prince's side 
Then seek counsel of the wise people of the state. 


What Cao Cao said will be disclosed in later chapters. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 3: 
In Wenming Garden, Dong Zhuo Denounces Ding Yuan; 
With Red-Hare, Li Su Bribes Lu Bu. 


What Cao Cao said was this: "The eunuch evil is of very old standing, but the real 
cause of the present trouble is in the improper influence allowed them by the 
emperors and the misplaced favoritism they have enjoyed. But a gaoler would be 
ample force to employ against this kind of evil, and getting rid of the main culprits is 
quite enough. Why increase confusion by summoning troops from the regions? Any 
desire to slay all of them will speedily become known, and the plan will fail." 


"Then, Cao Cao, you have some scheme of your own to further," said He Jin with 
a sneer. 


Cao Cao left the meeting, proclaiming, "The one throwing the world into chaos is 
He Jin!" 


Then He Jin sent swift, secret letters far and wide to several bases. 


It must be recalled that Dong Zhuo had failed in his attempt to destroy the Yellow 
Scarves rebellion. He would have been punished if he had not bribed the Ten 
Eunuchs heavily for their protection. Later, he obtained the rank of Imperial 
Protector in the westernmost region of Xizhou and an army of two hundred 
thousand troops. But Dong Zhuo was treacherous and disloyal at heart. So when 
he received the summons to the capital, he rejoiced greatly and lost no time in 
obeying it. He left a son-in-law, Commander Niu Fu, to look after the affairs of 
Xizhou and set out for Luoyang. Dong Zhuo took with him a huge army and four 
generals-~-Li Jue, Guo Si, Zhang Ji, and Fan Chou. 


Dong Zhuo's adviser and son-in-law, Li Ru, said, "Though a formal summons 
has come, there are many obscurities in it. It would be well to send up a memorial 
stating plainly our aims and intentions. Then we can proceed." 


So Dong Zhuo composed something like this: 


"Thy servant knows that the continual rebellions owe their origin to the eunuchs 
who act counter to all recognized precepts. Now to stop the ebullition of a pot the 
best way is to withdraw the fire; to cut out an abscess, though painful, is better than 
to nourish the evil. | have dared to undertake a military advance on the capital, with 
thy permission, and now pray that Zhang Rang and the other eunuchs be removed 
for the happiness of the dynasty and of the empire." 


He Jin read this memorial and showed it to his partisans. Then said Minister 
Zheng Tai, "A fierce wild beast; if he comes, his prey will be humans!" 


He Jin replied, "You are too timorous; you are unequal to great schemes." 


But Lu Zhi also said, "Long have | known this man; in appearance innocent, he 
is a very wolf at heart. Let him in, and calamity enters with him. Stop him, do not let 
him come, and thus will you avoid chaos." 


He Jin was obstinate, and both Zheng Tai and Lu Zhi gave up their posts and 
retired, as did more than half the ministers of state, while He Jin sent a warm 
welcome to Dong Zhuo, who soon camped at Shengchi Lake and stationed there 
without further action. 


The eunuchs knew this move was directed against them and recognized that 


their only chance for safety was to strike the first blow. So they first hid a band of fifty 
armed ruffians at the Gate of Grand Virtue in the Palace of Happiness, then they 
went in to see Empress He. 


They said, "The General, feigning to act under command, has called up armies 
to the capital to destroy us. We pray you, Your Majesty, pity and save us!" 


"Go to the General and confess your faults," said the Empress. 


"If we did, then should we be cut to mincemeat. Rather summon the General into 
your presence and command him to cease. If he will not, then we pray but die in 
your presence." 


The Empress issued the requisite command, and He Jin was just going to her 
when Counselor Chen Lin advised him not to enter, saying, "The eunuchs are 
certainly behind the order and mean your harm." 


But He Jin could only see the command of the Empress and was blind to all 
else. 


"Our plot is no longer a secret;" said Yuan Shao, "still you may go if you are 
ready to fight your way in." 


"Get the eunuchs out first," said Cao Cao. 


"Silly children!" said He Jin. "What can they do against the man who holds the 
forces of the empire in the palm of his hand?" 


Yuan Shao said, "If you will go, then we will come as a guard, just as a 
precaution." 


Whereupon both Yuan Shao and Cao Cao chose five hundred best men under 
their command, at whose head they placed a brother of Yuan Shao, named Yuan 
Shu. 


Yuan Shu, clad in mail, drew up his troops outside the palace entrance, while 
Yuan Shao and Cao Cao, holding swords, went as escort. When He Jin neared the 
palace, the eunuchs said, "The orders are to admit the Imperial Guardian and none 
other." 


So the escort was detained outside. He Jin went in proudly. At the Gate of Grand 
Virtue, he was met by Zhang Rang and Duan Gui, and their followers quickly 
closed in around him. He Jin began to feel alarmed. Then Zhang Rang in a harsh 
voice began to revile him. 


"What crime had Empress Dong committed that she should have been put to 


death? And when the Mother of the Country was buried, who feigned sickness and 
did not attend? We raised you and your paltry, huckstering family to all the dignity 
and wealth you have, and this is your gratitude! You would slay us. You call us 
sordid and dirty; who is the cleaner?" 


He Jin was panic stricken and looked about for a way to escape, but the 
eunuchs closed him in, and then the assassins appeared and cut He Jin into 
halves. 


Closing the days of the Hans, and the years of their rule were near spent, 
Stupid and tactless was He Jin, yet stood he highest in office; 

Many were they who advised him, but he was deaf as he heard not; 
Wherefore fell he a victim under the swords of the eunuchs. 


So He Jin died. Yuan Shao and Cao Cao waited long. By and by, impatient at 
the delay, they called through the gate, "Thy carriage waits, O General!" 


For reply the head of He Jin was flung over the wall. A decree was proclaimed: 
"He Jin has contemplated treachery and therefore has been slain. It pardons his 
adherents." 


Yuan Shao shouted, "The eunuchs have slain the High Minister. Let those who 
will slay this wicked party come and help me!" 


Then one of He Jin's generals, Wu Kuang, set fire to the gate. Yuan Shu at the 
head of his guards burst in and fell to slaying the eunuchs without regard to age or 
rank. Yuan Shao and Cao Cao broke into the inner part of the palace. Four of the 
eunuchs-~-Zhao Zhong, Cheng Kuang, Xia Yun, and Guo Sheng-~-fled to the Blue 
Flower Lodge where they were hacked to pieces. Fire raged, destroying the 
buildings. 


Four of the Ten Regular Attendants-~-Zhang Rang, Duan Gui, Cao Jie, and Hou 
Lan-~-led by Zhang Rang carried off the Empress, Emperor Bian, and Prince Xian 
of Chenliu toward the north palace. 


Lu Zhi, since he had resigned office, was at home, but hearing of the revolution 
in the Palace he donned his armor, took his spear, and prepared to fight. He saw 
the eunuch Duan Gui hurrying the Empress along and called out, "You rebel, how 
dare you abduct the Empress?" 


The eunuch fled. The Empress leaped out of a window and was taken to a place 
of safety. 


General Wu Kuang burst into one of the inner halls where he found He Miao, 


sword in hand. 


"You also were in the plot to slay your own brother," cried Wu Kuang. "You shall 
die with the others." 


"Let us kill the plotter against his elder brother!" cried many. 


He Miao looked around; his enemies hemmed him in on every side. He was 
hacked to pieces. 


Yuan Shu bade his soldiers scatter and seek out all the families of the eunuchs, 
sparing none. In that slaughter many beardless men were killed in error. 


Cao Cao set himself to extinguish the fires. He then begged Empress He to 
undertake the direction of affairs, and soldiers were sent to pursue Zhang Rang 
and rescue the young Emperor and the young Prince of Chenliu. 


Meanwhile, Zhang Rang and Duan Gui had hustled away the Emperor and the 
Prince. They burst through the smoke and fire and traveled without stopping till they 
reached the Beimang Hills. It was then the third watch. They heard a great shouting 
behind them and saw soldiers in pursuit. Their leader, Min Gong, a commander in 
Henan, was shouting "Traitors, stop, stop!" 


Zhang Rang, seeing that he was lost, jumped into the river, where he was 
drowned. 


The two boys ignorant of the meaning of all this confusion and terrified out of 
their senses, dared not utter a cry; they crept in among the rank grass on the river 
bank and hid. The soldiers scattered in all directions but failed to find them. So they 
remained till the fourth watch, shivering with cold from the drenching dew and very 
hungry. They lay down in the thick grass and wept in each other's arms, silently, 
lest any one should discover them. 


"This is no a place to stay in;" said Prince Xian, "we must find some way out." 


So the two children knotted their clothes together and managed to crawl up the 
bank. They were in a thicket of thorn bushes, and it was quite dark. They could not 
see any path. They were in despair when, all at once, millions of fireflies sprang up 
all about them and circled in the air in front of the Emperor. 


"God is helping us," said Prince Xian. 
They followed whither the fireflies led and gradually got into a road. They walked 


till their feet were too sore to go further, when, seeing a heap of straw near the 
road, they crept to it and lay down. 


This heap of straw was close to a farm house. In the night, as the farmer was 
sleeping, he saw in a vision two bright red suns drop behind his dwelling. Alarmed 
by the portent, he hastily dressed and went forth to look about him. Then he saw a 
bright light shooting up from a heap of straw. He hastened thither and then saw two 
youths lying behind it. 


"To what household do you belong, young gentlemen?" asked the farmer. 


The Emperor was too frightened to reply, but his companion said, "He is the 
Emperor. There was a revolution in the palace, and we ran away. | am his brother 
Prince of Chenliu." 


The farmer bowed again and again and said, "My name is Sui Lie. My brother 
Sui Yi is the former minister of the interior. My brother was disgusted with the 
behavior of the eunuchs and so resigned and hid away here." 


The two lads were taken into the farm, and their host on his knees served them 
with refreshment. 


It has been said that Min Gong had gone in pursuit of Eunuch Duan Gui. By and 
by Min Gong overtook Duan Gui and cried, "Where is the Emperor?" 


"He disappeared. | do not know where he is." 


Min Gong slew Duan Gui and hung the bleeding head on his horse's neck. Then 
he sent his troops searching in all directions, and he rode off by himself on the 
same quest. Presently he came to the farm. Sui Lie, seeing what hung on his 
horse's neck, questioned him and, satisfied with his story, led him to the Emperor. 
The meeting was affecting; all were moved to tears. 


"The state cannot be without its ruler," said Min Gong. "I pray Your Majesty return 
to the city." 


At the farm they had but one sorry nag and this they saddled for the Emperor. 
The young Prince was taken on Min Gong's charger. And thus they left the farm. 
Not beyond one mile from the farm, they fell in with other officials and several 
hundred guards and soldiers made up an imposing cavalcade. In the cavalcade 
were Wang Yun, Minister of the Interior; Yang Biao, Regent Marshal; Chunyu 
Qiong, Commander of the Left Army; Zhao Meng, Commander of the Right Army; 
Bao Xin, Commander of the Rear Army; and Yuan Shao, Commander of the 
Central Army. Tears were shed freely as the ministers met their Emperor. 


A man was sent on in front to the capital there to expose the head of Eunuch 
Duan Gui. 


As soon as they could, they placed the Emperor on a better steed and the young 


Prince had a horse to himself. Thus the Emperor returned to Luoyang, and so it 
happened after all as the street children's ditty ran: 


Though the emperor doesn't rule, though the prince no office fills, 
Yet a brilliant cavalcade comes along from Beimang Hills. 


The cavalcade had not proceeded far when they saw coming towards them a 
large body of soldiers with fluttering banners hiding the sun and raising a huge 
cloud of dust. The officials turned pale, and the Emperor was greatly alarmed. Yuan 
Shao rode out in advance. 


"Who are you?" said Yuan Shao. 


From under the shade of an embroidered banner rode out a general, saying, 
"Do you have the Emperor?" 


The Emperor was too panic stricken to respond, but the Prince of Chenliu rode 
to the front and cried, "Who are you?" 


"Dong Zhuo, Imperial Protector of Xizhou." 

"Have you come to protect the Chariot or to steal it?" said Prince Xian. 

"| have come to protect," said Dong Zhuo. 

"If that is so, the Emperor is here; why do you not dismount?" 

Dong Zhuo hastily dismounted and made obeisance on the left of the road. Then 
Prince Xian spoke graciously to him. From first to last the Prince had carried himself 
most perfectly so that Dong Zhuo in his heart admired his behavior, and then arose 


the first desire to set aside the Emperor in favor of the Prince of Chenliu. 


They reached the Palace the same day, and there was an affecting interview 
with Empress He. 


But when they had restored order in the palace, the Imperial Hereditary Seal, the 
special seal of the Emperor, was missing. 


Dong Zhuo camped without the walls, but every day he was to be seen in the 
streets with an escort of mailed soldiers so that the common people were in a state 
of constant trepidation. He also went in and out of the Palace careless of all the 
rules of propriety. 


Imperial Commander Bao Xin spoke of Dong Zhuo's behavior to Yuan Shao, 


saying, "This man harbors some evil design and should be removed." 
"Nothing can he done till the government is more settled," said Yuan Shao. 
Then Bao Xin saw Minister of the Interior Wang Yun and asked what he thought. 
"Let us talk it over," was the reply. 


Bao Xin said no more but he left the capital and retired to the Taishan 
Mountains. 


Dong Zhuo induced the soldiers of the two brothers He Jin and He Miao to join 
his command, and privately spoke to his adviser Li Ru about deposing the Emperor 
in favor of the Prince of Chenliu. 


"The government is really without a head; there can be no better time than this to 
carry out your plan. Delay will spoil all. Tomorrow assemble the officials in the 
Wenming Garden and address them on the subject. Put all opponents to death, 
and your prestige is settled." 


So spoke Li Ru and the words pleased Dong Zhuo mightily. 


So the next day Dong Zhuo spread a feast and invited many guests. As all the 
officers went in terror of him, no one dared be absent. Dong Zhuo himself rode up 
to the garden last of all and took his place with his sword girded on. When the wine 
had gone round several times, Dong Zhuo stopped the service and the music and 
began to speak. 


"| have something to say; listen quietly all of you." 
All turned towards him. 


"The emperor is lord of all; and if he lacks dignity and behaves in an unseemly 
manner, he is no fitting inheritor of the ancestral prerogatives. He who is now on 
the throne is a weakling, inferior to the Prince of Chenliu in intelligence and love of 
learning. The Prince is in every way fitted for the throne. | desire to depose the 
Emperor and set up the Prince in his place. What think you?" 


The assembly listened in perfect silence, none daring at first to utter a word of 
dissent. But one dared; for suddenly a guest stood up in his place, smote the table 
and cried. 


"No! No! Who are you that you dare utter such bold words? The Emperor is the 
son of the lawful consort and has done no wrong. Why then should he be 
deposed? Are you a rebel?" 


The speaker was Ding Yuan, Imperial Protector of Jingzhou. 


Dong Zhuo glared at Ding Yuan, roaring, "There is life for those who are with 
me, death for those against." 


Dong Zhuo drew his sword and made for the objector. But the watchful Li Ru 
had noticed standing behind Ding Yuan a particularly dangerous looking 
henchman of his, who was now handling his halberd threateningly, and whose 
eyes were blazing with anger. So Li Ru hastily interposed, saying, "But this is the 
banquet chamber, and state affairs should be left outside. The matters can be fully 
discussed tomorrow." 


His fellow guests persuaded Ding Yuan to leave, and after his departure Dong 
Zhuo said, "Is what | said just and reasonable?" 


"You are mistaken, Illustrious Sir," said Lu Zhi. "Of old Emperor Tai Jia of the 
Shang Dynasty was unenlightened. Wherefore the sage Minister Yi Yin immured 
him in the Tung Palace till he reformed. Later Prince Changyi ascended the throne, 
and in twenty-seven days he committed more than three thousand categorical 
faults. Wherefore Regent Marshal Huo Guang declared in the ancestral temple that 
Prince Changyi was deposed. Our present Emperor is young, but he is intelligent, 
benevolent, and wise. He has not committed a single fault. You, Sir, are an imperial 
protector of a frontier region and not a metropolitan official and have had no 
experience in state administration. Neither have you the pure intentions of Yi Yin 
and Huo Guang which qualified their actions. Without that justification such an act 
is presumption." 


Dong Zhuo angrily drew his sword to slay the bold Lu Zhi, but two other officials 
remonstrated. 


"Minister Lu Zhi is the cynosure of the whole country, and his violent death 
would stir the hearts of all humans," said Court Counselors Cai Yong and Peng Bo. 


Dong Zhuo then stayed his hand. 


Then said Wang Yun, "A great question like the deposition and substitution of 
emperors is not one to be decided after a wine party. Let it be put off till another 
time." 


So the guests dispersed. Dong Zhuo stood at the gate with drawn sword 
watching them depart. Standing thus, Dong Zhuo noticed a spearman galloping to 
and fro on a fiery steed and asked Li Ru who that was. 


"That is Lu Bu, the adopted son of Ding Yuan. You must keep out of his way, my 
lord." 


Dong Zhuo went inside the gate so that he could not be seen. But next day a 
man reported to him that Ding Yuan had come out of the city with a small army and 
was Challenging to a battle. Dong Zhuo, with his army, went forth to accept the 
challenge. And the two armies were drawn up in proper array. 


Lu Bu was a conspicuous figure in the forefront. His hair was arranged under a 
handsome headdress of gold, and he had donned a embroidered thousand-flower 
fighting robe, a pheasant-tailed helmet, and breast plate, and round his waist was a 
gleaming jade belt with a lion's head clasp. With spear set he rode close behind his 
master Ding Yuan. 


Ding Yuan, riding forth, pointing his finger at Dong Zhuo, began to revile him. 


"Unhappy indeed was this state when the eunuchs became so powerful that the 
people were as if trodden into the mire under their feet. Now you, devoid of the 
least merit, dare to talk of deposing the rightful emperor and setting up another. 
This is to desire rebellion and no less." 


Dong Zhuo could not reply for Lu Bu, eager for the fight, rode straight at him. 
Dong Zhuo fled and Ding Yuan's army came on. The battle went in Ding Yuan's 
favor, and the beaten troops retired ten miles and made another camp. Here Dong 
Zhuo called his officers to a council. 


"This Lu Bu is a marvel," said Dong Zhuo. "If he were only on my side, | would 
defy the whole world." 


At this a man advanced saying, "Be content, O my lord! | am a fellow villager of 
his and know him well, his bravery, his prowess, his cupidity, and his 
unscrupulousness. With this little, blarneying tongue of mine, | can persuade him to 
put up his hands and come over to your side." 


Dong Zhuo was delighted and gazed admiringly at the speaker. It was Li Su, a 
general in the Imperial Tiger Army. 


"What arguments will you use with him?" asked Dong Zhuo. 

"You have a fine horse, Red-Hare, one of the best ever bred; | must have this 
steed, and gold and pearls to win his heart. Then will | go and persuade him. He 
will certainly abandon Ding Yuan's service for yours." 

"What think you?" said Dong Zhuo to his adviser Li Ru. 


"One cannot grudge a horse to win an empire," was the reply. 


So they grave Li Su what he demanded-~-a thousand ounces of gold, ten strings 
of beautiful pearls, a jeweled belt, and Red-Hare-~-and these accompanied Li Su 


on his visit to his fellow villager. 


Li Su reached the camp and said to the guard, "Please tell General Lu Bu that a 
very old friend has come to visit him." 


He was admitted forthwith. 


"Worthy brother, have you been well since we last met?" greeted Li Su while 
bowing. 


"How long it is since we last saw each other!" replied Lu Bu, bowing in return. 
"And where are you now?" 


"| am a general in the Imperial Tiger Army. When | learned you were a strong 
supporter of the Throne, | could not say how | rejoiced. | have come now to present 
to you a really fine horse, a five-hundred-mile-a-day horse, one that crosses rivers 
and goes up mountains as if they were the level plain. Its name is Red-Hare. It will 
be a fitting aid to your valor." 


Lu Bu bade his guards lead out the horse. It was of a uniform color like glowing 
sun red; not a hair of another color. It measured ten spans from head to tail and 
from hoof to neck eight spans. When it neighed, the sound filled the empyrean and 
shook the ocean. 


Mark ye the steed swift and tireless, see the dust, spurned by his hoofs, rising 
in clouds; 

Now it swims the river, anon climbs the hill, rending the purple mist asunder; 

Scornful it breaks the rein, shakes from its head the jeweled bridle; 

Itis as a fiery dragon descending from the highest heaven. 


Lu Bu was delighted with the horse and said, "What return can | hope to make 
for such a creature?" 


"What return can | hope for? | came to you out of a sense of what is right," replied 
Li Su. 


Wine was brought in and they drank. 


"We have seen very little of each other, but | am constantly meeting your 
honorable father," said Li Su. 


"You are drunk," said Lu Bu. "My father has been dead for years." 


"Not so; | spoke of Ding Yuan, the man of the day." 


Lu Bu started. "Yes, | am with him but only because | can do no better." 

"Sir, your talent is higher than the heavens, deeper than the seas. Who in all the 
world does not bow before your name? Fame and riches and honors are yours for 
the taking. And you say you can do no better than remain a subordinate!" 

"If | could only find a master to serve!" said Lu Bu. 

"The clever bird chooses the branch whereon to perch; the wise servant selects 
the master to serve. Seize the chance when it comes, for repentance ever comes 
too late." 


"Now you are in the government. Who think you is really the bravest of all?", 
asked Lu Bu. 


"| despise the whole lot except Dong Zhuo. He is one who respects wisdom and 
reveres scholarship; he is discriminating in his rewards and punishments. Surely 
he is destined to be a really great man." 


Lu Bu said, "I wish that | could serve him, but there is no way, | fear." 


Then Li Su produced his pearls and gold and the jeweled belt and laid them out 
before his host. 


"What is this? What does it mean?" said Lu Bu. 

"Send away the attendants," requested Li Su. And he went on, "Dong Zhuo has 
long respected your valor and sent these by my hand. Red-Hare was also from 
him." 


"But, if he loves me like this, what can | do in return?" 


Li Su said, "If a stupid fellow like me can be a general in the Imperial Tiger Army, 
it is impossible to say what honors await you." 


"lam sorry | can offer him no service worth mentioning." 


Li Su said, "There is one service you can do, and an extremely easy one to 
perform; but you would not render that." 


Lu Bu pondered long in silence, then he said, "| might slay Ding Yuan and bring 
over his soldiers to Dong Zhuo's side; what think you of that?" 


"If you would do that, there could be no greater service. But such a thing must be 
done quickly." 


And Lu Bu promised his friend that he would do the deed and come over on the 
morrow. 


So Li Su took his leave. That very night, at the second watch, Lu Bu entered, 
sword in hand, into his master's tent. He found Ding Yuan reading by the light of a 
solitary candle. 


Seeing who came in, Ding Yuan said, "My son, what is afoot?" 
"lam a bold hero," said Lu Bu. "Don't you think | am willing to be a son of yours." 
"Why this change, Lu Bu?" 


As areply Lu Bu made one cut, and Ding Yuan's head fell to the earth. Then Lu 
Bu called the attendants and said, "He was an unjust man and | have slain him. Let 
those who back me stay; the others may depart." 


Most ran away. Next day, with the head of the murdered man as his gift, Lu Bu 
betook himself to Li Su, who led him to Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo received him with a 
warm welcome and had wine set before him. 


"Your coming is welcome as the gentle dew to the parched grass," said Dong 
Zhuo. 


Lu Bu made Dong Zhuo seat himself and then made an obeisance, saying, 
"Pray let me bow to you as my adopted father." 


Dong Zhuo gave his newly won ally gold and armor and silken robes and 
spread the feast of welcome. They then separated. 


Thence Dong Zhuo's power and influence increased rapidly. He gave the 
lordship of Hu and the rank Commander of the Left Army to his brother Dong Min. 
He appointed Lu Bu Lord of Luoyang, Commander of Capital District, and 
Commander of the Right Army. Dong Zhuo made himself Commander of the 
Central Army. 


The adviser Li Ru never ceased from urging him to carry out the design of 
deposing the young Emperor. 


The now all-powerful Dong Zhuo prepared a banquet in the capital at which all 
the officers of state were guests. He also bade Lu Bu post a company of armed 
men right and left ready for action. The feast began and several courses were 
served with nothing to distinguish that banquet from any other. 


Then suddenly the host arose and drew his sword, saying, "He who is above us 


being weak and irresolute is unfit for the duties of his high place. Wherefore I, as of 
old did Yi Yin and Huo Guang, will set aside this Emperor giving him the title of 
Prince of Hongnong, and | will place on the throne the present Prince of Chenliu. 
And those who do not support me will suffer death." 


Fear seized them in its grip and they were silent, all but Yuan Shao who said, 
"The Emperor was innocent of any fault, and to set him aside in favor of a 
commoner was rebellion and nothing else." 


"The empire is in my hands;" cried Dong Zhuo, "and when | choose to do this 
thing, who will dare say nay? Think you my sword lacks an edge?" 


"If your sword is sharp, mine is never blunt," said Yuan Shao as his sword 
flashed out of the sheath. 


The two men stood face to face amid the feasters. 


When Ding Yuan by treacherous murder died, 
The loss was great to Yuan Shao's side. 


The fate of Yuan Shao will be disclosed in later chapters. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 4: 
The Deposition Of The Emperor: Prince Of Chenliu Becomes Emperor; 
Schemes Against Dong Zhuo: Cao Cao Presents A Sword. 


Dong Zhuo was on the point of slaying Yuan Shao, but Li Ru checked him, saying, 
"You must not kill rashly while the business hangs in the balance." 


Yuan Shao, his sword still unsheathed, left the assembly. He hung up the seals 
of his office at the east gate and went to Jizhou Region. 


Dong Zhuo said to Imperial Guardian Yuan Wei, "Your nephew behaved 
improperly, but | pardon him for your sake; what think you of my scheme?" 


"What you think is right," was the reply. 


"If any one opposes the great scheme, he will be dealt with by military law," said 
Dong Zhuo. 


The ministers, thoroughly dreaded, promised obedience, and the feast came to 
an end. 


Dong Zhuo asked Counselor Zhou Bi and Commandant Wu Qiong what they 
thought of the flight of Yuan Shao. 


Zhou Bi said, "He left in a state of great anger. In such a state of excitement 
much harm may ensue to the present state of affairs, especially as the Yuan family 
have been noted for their high offices for four generations, and their proteges and 
dependents are everywhere. If they assemble bold spirits and call up their clients, 
all the valiant warriors will be in arms, and the east region of the Huashang 
Mountains will be lost. You would better pardon Yuan Shao and give him a post. 
He will be glad at being forgiven and will do no harm." 


Wu Qiong said, "Yuan Shao is fond of scheming, but he fails in decision and so 
is not to be feared. But it would be well to give him rank and thus win popular 
favor." 


Dong Zhuo followed this advice and thereupon sent a messenger to offer Yuan 
Shao the governorship of Bohai. 


On the first day of the ninth month, the Emperor was invited to proceed to the 
Hall of Virtue where was a great assembly of officials. There Dong Zhuo, sword in 
hand, faced the gathering and said, "The Emperor is a weakling unequal to the 
burden of ruling this land. Now listen ye to the document | have prepared." 


And Li Ru read as follows: 


"The dutiful Emperor Ling too soon left his people. The emperor is the cynosure 
of all the people of this land. Upon the present Emperor Bian, the Heaven has 
conferred but small gifts: in dignity and deportment he is deficient, and in mourning 
he is remiss. Only the most complete virtue can grace imperial dignity. Empress He 
has trained him improperly, and the whole state administration has fallen into 
confusion. Empress Dong died suddenly and no one knew why. The doctrine of the 
three bonds-~-Heaven, Earth, and Human-~-and the continuity of Heaven and 


Earth interdependence have both been injured. 


"But Liu Xian, Prince of Chenliu, is sage and virtuous beside being of handsome 
exterior. He conforms to all the rules of propriety: his mourning is sincere and his 
speech is always correct. Eulogies of him fill the empire. He is well fitted for the 
great duty of consolidating the rule of Han. 


"Now therefore the Emperor is deposed and created Prince of Hongnong, and 
Empress He retires from the administration. 


"| pray the Prince of Chenliu to accept the throne in conformity with the decrees 
of Heaven and Earth, the desires of people, and the fulfillment of the hopes of 
humankind." 


This having been read, Dong Zhuo bade the attendants lead the Emperor down 
from the throne, remove his seal, and cause him to kneel facing the north, styling 
himself faithful servant of the Throne and requesting commands. Moreover Dong 
Zhuo bade Empress He strip off her royal dress of ceremony and await the imperial 
command. Both victims of this oppression wept bitterly, and every minister present 
was deeply affected. 


One minister put his discontent into words, crying, "The false Dong Zhuo is the 
author of this insult, which | will risk my life to wipe away." 


And with this he rushed at Dong Zhuo threatening with his ivory baton of office. 


It was Secretary Ding Guan. Dong Zhuo had Ding Guan removed and summarily 
put to death. Before his death, Ding Guan ceased not to rail at the oppressor, nor 
was he frightened at death. 


The rebel Dong Zhuo conceived the foul design 
To thrust the King aside and wrong his line. 

With folded arms the courtiers stood, save one 
Ding Guan, who dared to cry that wrong was done. 


Then the Emperor designate, Prince of Chenliu, went to the upper part of the hall 
to receive congratulations. After this the late Emperor-~-now Prince of Hongnong- 
~-, his mother, and the Imperial Consort, Lady Tang, were removed to the Palace of 
Forever Calm. The entrance gates were locked against all comers. 


It was pitiful! There was the young emperor, after reigning less than half a year, 
deposed and another put in his place. The new Emperor was Liu Xian, the second 
son of the late Emperor Ling. He was nine years of age, five years younger than his 
deposed brother. The new reign-style was changed to Inauguration of Tranquillity, 


the first year (AD 190). 


Becoming the Prime Minister, Dong Zhuo was most powerful and arrogant. 
When he bowed before the Throne, he did not declare his name; in going to court 
he did not hasten. Booted and armed he entered the reception halls. He amassed 
a wealth exceeding any other's. 


His adviser, Li Ru, impressed upon Dong Zhuo constantly to employ people of 
reputation so that he should gain public esteem. So when they told him Cai Yong 
was a man of talent, Dong Zhuo summoned him. But Cai Yong would not go. Dong 
Zhuo sent a message to him that if he did not come, he and his whole clan should 
be exterminated. Then Cai Yong gave in and appeared. Dong Zhuo was very 
gracious to him and promoted him thrice in a month. Cai Yong became High 
Minister. Such was the generosity of the tyrant. 


Meanwhile the deposed ruler, his mother, and his consort were immured in the 
Palace of Forever Calm and found their daily supplies gradually diminishing. The 
deposed Emperor wept incessantly. One day a pair of wallows gliding to and fro 
moved him to verse: 


Spring and the green of the tender grass, 

Flushes with joy as the swallows pass; 

The wayfarers pause by the rippling stream, 

And their eyes will new born gladness gleam; 

With lingering gaze the roofs | see 

Of the palace that one time sheltered me. 

But those whom | sheltered in all righteousness, 

Let's not stay in silence when the days pass useless? 


The messenger, sent by Dong Zhuo from time to time to the palace for news of 
the prisoners, got hold of this poem and showed it to his master. 


"So he shows his resentment by writing poems, eh! A fair excuse to put them all 
out of the way," said Dong Zhuo. 


Li Ru was sent with ten men into the palace to consummate the deed. The three 
were in one of the upper rooms when Li Ru arrived. The Emperor shuddered when 
the maid announced the visitor's name. 


Presently Li Ru entered and offered a cup of poisoned wine to the Emperor. The 
Emperor asked what this meant. 


"Spring is the season of blending and harmonious interchange, and the Prime 
Minister sends a cup of the wine of longevity," said Li Ru. 


"If it be the wine of longevity, you may share it too," said Empress He. 

Then Li Ru became brutally frank. 

"You will not drink?" asked he. 

He called the men with daggers and cords and bade the Emperor look at them. 
"The cup, or these?" said he. 


Then said Lady Tang, "Let the handmaiden drink in place of her lord. Spare the 
mother and her son, | pray." 


"And who may you be to die for a prince?" said Li Ru. 
Then he presented the cup to the Empress once more and bade her drink. 


She railed against her brother, the feckless He Jin, the author of all this trouble. 
She would not drink. 


Next Li Ru approached the Emperor. 


"Let me say farewell to my mother," begged he, and he did so in these lines: 


"The heaven and earth are changed; Alas! the sun and the moon leave 
their courses, 

|, once the center of all eyes, am driven to the farthest confines. 

Oppressed by an arrogant minister my life nears its end, 

Everything fails me and vain are my falling tears." 


Lady Tang sang: 


"Heaven is to be rent asunder, Earth to fall away; 

|, handmaid of an Emperor, would grieve if | followed him not. 

We have come to the parting of ways, the quick and the dead walk not 
together; 

Alas! | am left alone with the grief in my heart." 


When they had sung these lines, they fell weeping into each others' arms. 


"The Prime Minister is awaiting my report," said Li Ru, "and you delay too long. 


Think you that there is any hope of succor?" 


The Empress broke into another fit of railing, "The rebel forces us to death, 
mother and son, and Heaven has abandoned us. But you, the tool of his crime, will 
assuredly perish." 


Thereupon Li Ru grew more angry, laid hands on the Empress and threw her 
out of the window. Then he bade the soldiers strangle Lady Tang and forced the 
lad to swallow the wine of death. 


Li Ru reported the achievement to his master who bade them bury the victims 
without the city. After this Dong Zhuo's behavior was more atrocious than before. 
He spent his nights in the Palace, defiled the imperial concubines there, and even 
slept on the Dragon Couch. 


Once he led his soldiers out of the city to Yangcheng when the villagers, men 
and women, were assembled from all sides for the annual spring festival. His 
troops surrounded the place and plundered it. They took away booty by the cart 
load, and women prisoners and more than one thousand severed heads. The 
procession returned to Capital Luoyang and published a story that they had 
obtained a great victory over some rebels. They burned the heads beneath the 
walls, and the women and jewelry were shared out among the soldiers. 


A general named Wu Fu was disgusted at this ferocity and sought a chance to 
slay Dong Zhuo. Wu Fu constantly wore a breastplate underneath his court dress 
and carried in conceal a sharp dagger. One day when Dong Zhuo came to court, 
Wu Fu met him on the steps and tried to stab him. But Dong Zhuo was a very 
powerful man and held Wu Fu off till Lu Bu came to his help. Lu Bu struck down the 
assailant. 


"Who told you to rebel?" said Dong Zhuo. 


Wu Fu glared at him and cried, "You are not my prince, | am not your minister: 
where is the rebellion? Your crimes fill the heavens, and every man would slay 
you. | am sorry | cannot tear you asunder with chariots to appease the wrath of the 
world!" 


Dong Zhuo bade the guards take him out and hack him to pieces. Wu Fu only 
ceased railing as he ceased to live. 


That loyal servant of the latter days of Han. 

His valor was high as the Heavens, in all ages unequaled; 
In the court itself would he slay the rebel, great is his fame! 
Throughout all time will people call him a hero. 


Thereafter Dong Zhuo always went well guarded. 


At Bohai, Yuan Shao heard of Dong Zhuo's misuse of power and sent a secret 
letter to Minister of the Interior Wang Yun: 


"That rebel Dong Zhuo outrages Heaven and has deposed his ruler. Common 
people dare not speak of him; that is understandable. Yet you suffer his 
aggressions as if you knew naught of them. How then are you a dutiful and loyal 
minister? | have assembled an army and desire to sweep clean the royal 
habitation, but | dare not lightly begin the task. If you are willing, then find an 
opportunity to plot against this man. If you would use force, | am at your command." 


The letter arrived but Wang Yun could see no chance to plot against Dong Zhuo. 
One day while among the throng in attendance, mostly people of long service, 
Wang Yun said to his colleagues, "This is my birthday, | pray you come to a little 
party in my humble cot this evening." 


"We certainly will," they cried, "and wish you long life." 

That night the tables were spread in an inner room, and his friends gathered 
there. When the wine had made a few rounds, the host suddenly covered his face 
and began to weep. 

The guests were aghast. 

"Sir, on your birthday too, why do you weep?" said they. 

"It is not my birthday," replied Wang Yun. "But | wished to call you together and | 
feared lest Dong Zhuo should suspect, so | made that the excuse. This man insults 
the Emperor and does as he wishes so that the imperial prerogatives are in 
imminent peril. | think of the days when our illustrious founder destroyed the Qin, 
annihilated Chu, and obtained the empire. Who could have foreseen this day when 
that Dong Zhuo has subjugated all to his will? That is why | weep." 

Then they all wept with him. 


Seated among the guests, however, was Cao Cao, who did not join in the 
weeping but clapped his hands and laughed aloud. 


"If all the officers of the government weep till dawn, and from dawn weep till dark, 
will that slay Dong Zhuo?" said Cao Cao. 


Wang Yun turned on him angrily. 


"Your forbears ate the bounty of the Hans; do you feel no gratitude? You can 


laugh?" 

"| laughed at the absurdity of an assembly like this being unable to compass the 
death of one man. Foolish and incapable as | am, | will cut off his head and hang it 
at the gate as an offering to the people." 

Wang Yun left his seat and went over to Cao Cao. 

"These later days," Cao Cao continued, "| have bowed my head to Dong Zhuo 
with the sole desire of finding a chance to destroy him. Now he begins to trust me 
and so | can approach him sometimes. You have a sword with seven precious 
jewels which | would borrow, and | will go into his palace and kill him. | care not if | 
die for it." 

"What good fortune for the world that this is so!" said Wang Yun. 

With this Wang Yun himself poured out a goblet for Cao Cao who drained it and 
swore an oath. After this the treasured sword was brought out and given to Cao 
Cao who hid it under his dress. He finished his wine, took leave of the guests, and 
left the hall. Before long the others dispersed. 


The next day Cao Cao, with this short sword girded on, came to the palace of the 
Prime Minister. 


"Where is the Prime Minister?" asked he. 
"In the small guest room," replied the attendants. 


So Cao Cao went in and found his host seated on a couch; Lu Bu was at his 
side. 


"Why so late, Cao Cao?" said Dong Zhuo. 
"My horse is out of condition and slow," replied Cao Cao. 
Dong Zhuo turned to his henchman Lu Bu. 


"Some good horses have come in from the west. You go and pick out a good 
one as a present for him." 


And Lu Bu left. 
"This traitor is doomed," thought Cao Cao. He ought to have struck then, but Cao 


Cao knew Dong Zhuo was very powerful, and he was afraid to act; he wanted to 
make sure of his blow. 


Now Dong Zhuo's corpulence was such that he could not remain long sitting, so 
he rolled over couch and lay face inwards. 


"Now is the time," thought the assassin, and he gripped the good sword firmly. 


But just as Cao Cao was going to strike, Dong Zhuo happened to look up and in 
a mirror he saw the reflection of Cao Cao behind him with a sword in the hand. 


"What are you doing, Cao Cao?" said Dong Zhuo turning suddenly. And at that 
moment Lu Bu came along leading a horse. 


Cao Cao in a flurry dropped on his knees and said, "| have a precious sword 
here which | wish to present to Your Benevolence." 


Dong Zhuo took it. It was a fine blade, over a foot in length, inlaid with the seven 
precious signs and very keen-~-a fine sword in very truth. Dong Zhuo handed the 
weapon to Lu Bu while Cao Cao took off the sheath which he also gave to Lu Bu. 


Then they went out to look at the horse. Cao Cao was profuse in his thanks and 
said he would like to try the horse. So Dong Zhuo bade the guards bring saddle 
and bridle. Cao Cao led the creature outside, leapt into the saddle, laid on his whip 
vigorously, and galloped away eastward. 


Lu Bu said, "Just as | was coming up, it seemed to me as if that fellow was going 
to stab you, only a sudden panic seized him and he presented the weapon 
instead." 

"| suspected him too," said Dong Zhuo. 

Just then Li Ru came in and they told him. 

"Cao Cao has no family here in the capital but lodges quite alone and not far 
away," said Li Ru. "Send for him. If he comes forthwith, the sword was meant as a 
gift; but if he makes any excuses, he had bad intentions. And you can arrest him." 

They sent four prison warders to call Cao Cao. They were absent a long time 
and then came back, saying, "Cao Cao had not returned to his lodging but rode in 
hot haste out of the eastern gate. To the gate commander's questions he replied 
that he was on a special message for the Prime Minister. He went off at full speed." 


"His conscience pricked him and so he fled; there is no doubt that he meant 
assassination," said Li Ru. 


"And | trusted him so well!" said Dong Zhuo in a rage. 


"There must be a conspiracy afoot. When we catch him, we shall know all about 


it," said Li Ru. 


Letters and pictures of the fugitive Cao Cao were sent everywhere with orders to 
catch him. A large reward in money was offered and a patent of nobility, while 
those who sheltered him would be held to share his guilt. 


Cao Cao traveled in hot haste toward Qiao, his home county. On the road at 
Zhongmou, he was recognized by the guards at the gate and made prisoner. They 
took him to the Magistrate. Cao Cao declared he was a merchant, named Huang 
Fu. The Magistrate scanned his face most closely and remained in deep thought. 


Presently the Magistrate said, "When | was at the capital seeking a post, | knew 
you as Cao Cao. Why do you try to conceal your identity?" 


The Magistrate ordered Cao Cao to the prison till the morrow when he could 
send Cao Cao to the capital and claim the reward. He gave the soldiers wine and 
food as a reward. 


About midnight the Magistrate sent a trusty servant to bring the prisoner into his 
private rooms for interrogation. 


"They say the Prime Minister treated you well; why did you try to harm him?" said 
Magistrate. 


"How can swallows and sparrows understand the flight of the crane and the wild 
goose? | am your prisoner and to be sent to the capital for a reward. Why so many 
questions?" 


The Magistrate sent away the attendants and turning to the prisoner said, "Do 
not despise me. | am no mere hireling, only | have not yet found the lord to serve." 


Said Cao Cao, "My ancestors enjoyed the bounty of Han, and should | differ from 
a bird or a beast if | did not desire to repay them with gratitude? | have bowed the 
knee to Dong Zhuo that thereby | might find an opportunity against him, and so 
remove this evil from the state. | have failed for this time. Such is the will of heaven." 


"And where are you going?" 


"Home to my county. Thence | shall issue a summons calling all the bold spirits 
to come with forces to kill the tyrant. This is my desire." 


Thereupon the Magistrate himself loosened the bonds of the prisoner, led him to 
the upper seat, and bowed, saying, "| am called Chen Gong. My aged mother and 
family are in the east county of Dongjun. | am deeply affected by your loyalty and 
uprightness, and | will abandon my office and follow you." 


Cao Cao was delighted with this turn of affairs. Chen Gong at once collected 
some money for the expenses of their journey and gave Cao Cao a different dress. 
Then each took a sword and rode away toward Qiao. Three days later at eventide 
they reached Chenggao. Cao Cao pointed with his whip to a hamlet deep in the 
woods and said, "There lives my uncle, Lu Boshe, a sworn-brother of my father. 
Suppose we go and ask news of my family and seek shelter for the night?" 


"Excellent!" said his companion Chen Gong, and they rode over, dismounted at 
the farm gate and entered. 


Lu Boshe greeted them and said to Cao Cao, "I hear the government has sent 
stringent orders on all sides to arrest you. Your father has gone into hiding to 
Chenliu. How has this all come about?" 


Cao Cao told him and said, "Had it not been for this man here with me, | should 
have been already hacked to pieces." 


Lu Boshe bowed low to Chen Gong, saying, "You are the salvation of the Cao 
family. But be at ease and rest, | will find you a bed in my humble cottage." 


Lu Boshe then rose and went into the inner chamber where he stayed a long 
time. When he came out, he said, "There is no good wine in the house. | am going 
over to the village to get some for you." 

And he hastily mounted his donkey and rode away. The two travelers sat a long 
time. Suddenly they heard at the back of the house the sound of sharpening a 
knife. 


Cao Cao said to Chen Gong, "He is not my real uncle; | am beginning to doubt 
the meaning of his going off. Let us listen." 


So they silently stepped out into a straw hut at the back. Presently some one 
said, "Bind before killing, eh?" 


"As | thought;" said Cao Cao, "now unless we strike first, we shall be taken." 


Suddenly Cao Cao and Chen Gong dashed in, sword in hand, and slew the 
whole household male and female, in all eight persons. 


After this they searched the house. In the kitchen they found a pig bound ready 
to kill. 


"You have made a huge mistake," said Chen Gong, "and we have slain honest 
folks." 


Cao Cao and Chen Gong at once mounted and rode away. Soon they met their 


host Lu Boshe coming home, and over the saddle in front of him they saw two 
vessels of wine. In his hands he carried fruit and vegetables. 


"Why are you going, Sirs?" Lu Boshe called to them. 
"Accused people dare not linger," said Cao Cao. 


"But | have bidden them kill a pig! Why do you refuse my poor hospitality? | pray 
you ride back with me." 


Cao Cao paid no heed, urging his horse forward. But he suddenly drew his 
sword and rode back after Lu Boshe. 


"Who is that coming along?" called Cao Cao. 


Lu Boshe turned and looked back, and Cao Cao at the same instant cut Lu 
Boshe down. 


Chen Gong was frightened. 
"You were wrong enough before," cried Chen Gong. "What now is this?" 


"When he got home and saw his family killed, think you he would bear it 
patiently? If he had raised an alarm and followed us, we should have been killed." 


"To kill deliberately is very wrong," said Chen Gong. 

"| would rather betray the world than let the world betray me!" was the reply. 

Chen Gong only thought. They rode on some distance by moonlight and 
presently knocked up an inn for shelter. Having first fed their horses, Cao Cao was 


soon asleep, but Chen Gong lay thinking. 


"| took him for a true man and left all to follow him, but he is as cruel as a wolf. If | 
spare him, he will do more harm later," thought Chen Gong. 


And Chen Gong rose intending to kill his companion. 


In his heart lie cruelty and venom, he is no true man; 
In nought does he differ from his enemy Dong Zhuo. 


The further fortunes of Cao Cao will be told in later chapters. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 5: 
Cao Cao Appeals To The Powerful Lords; 
The Three Brothers Fight Against Lu Bu. 


At the close of the last chapter, Chen Gong was about to slay Cao Cao. But Chen 
Gong reflected, "I joined him to do righteous things. Now if | killed him, | would only 
do unrighteousness and the people would condemn me. | rather leave in silence." 


Rising from his bed before the sunrise, Chen Gong mounted his horse and rode 
away eastward to his home county of Dongjun. 


Cao Cao awoke with the day and missed his companion. Thought he, "Chen 
Gong thinks me brutal because of a couple of egoistic phrases | used, and so he 
has gone. | ought to push on too and not linger here." 


So Cao Cao traveled as quickly as possible toward Qiao. When he saw his 
father, he related what had happened and said he wanted to dispose of all the 
family property and enlist soldiers with the money. 


"Our possessions are but small," said his father, "and not enough to do anything 
with. However, there is a graduate here, one Wei Hong, careless of wealth but 
careful of virtue, whose family is very rich. With his help we might hope for 
success." 


A feast was prepared and Wei Hong was invited. Cao Cao made him a speech: 
"The Hans have lost their lordship, and Dong Zhuo is really a tyrant. He flouts his 
prince and is cruel to the people, who gnash their teeth with rage. | would restore 
the Hans, but my means are insufficient. Sir, | appeal to your loyalty and public 
spirit." 


Wei Hong replied, "| have long desired this but, so far, have not found a person 
fit to undertake the task. Since you, Cao Cao, have so noble a desire, | willingly 
devote all my property to the cause." 


This was joyful news, and the call to arms was forthwith prepared and sent far 
and near. So they established a corps of volunteers and set up a large white 
recruiting banner with the words "Loyalty and Honor" inscribed thereon. The 
response was rapid, and volunteers came in like rain drops in number. 


One day came a certain Yue Jin from Yangping and another Li Dian from Julu. 
These two were appointed to Cao Cao's personal staff. Another was one Xiahou 
Dun from Qiao. He was descended from Xiahou Ying of old. Xiahou Dun had been 
trained from his early boyhood to use the spear and the club. When only fourteen 
he had been attached to a certain master-in-arms. One day one person spoke 
disrespectfully of his master, and Xiahou Dun killed that person. For this deed, 
however, he had to flee and had been an exile for some time. Now he came to offer 
his services, accompanied by his cousin Xiahou Yuan. Each brought a thousand 
trained soldiers. Really these two were brothers of Cao Cao by birth, since Cao 
Cao's father was originally of the Xiahou family, and had only been adopted into 
the Cao family. 


A few days later came Cao Cao's two cousins, Cao Ren and Cao Hong, each 
with one thousand followers. These two were accomplished horsemen and trained 
in the use of arms. 


Then drill began, and Wei Hong spent his treasure freely in buying clothing, 
armor, flags, and banners. From all sides poured in gifts of grain. 


When Yuan Shao received Cao Cao's call to arms, he collected all those under 
his command to the number of thirty thousand. Then he marched from Bohai to 
Qiao to take the oath to Cao Cao. Next a manifesto was issued: 


"Cao Cao and his associates, moved by a sense of duty, now make this 
proclamation. Dong Zhuo defies Heaven and Earth. He is destroying the state and 
injuring his prince. He pollutes the Palace and oppresses the people. He is vicious 
and cruel. His crimes are heaped up. Now we have received a secret command to 
call up soldiers, and we are pledged to cleanse the empire and destroy the evil- 
doers. We will raise a volunteer army and exert all our efforts to maintain the 
dynasty and succor the people. Respond to this, O Nobles, by mustering your 
soldiers." 


Many from every side answered the summons as the following list shows: 


.1. Governor of Nanyang-~-Yuan Shu; 


2. Imperial Protector of Jizhou Region-~-Han Fu; 
.3. Imperial Protector of Yuzhou Region-~-Kong Zhou; 
4. Imperial Protector of Yanzhou Region-~-Liu Dai; 
5. Governor of Henei-~-Wang Kuang; 

6. Governor of Chenliu-~-Zhang Miao; 

7. Governor of Dongjun-~-Qiao Mao; 

.8. Governor of Shanyang-~-Yuan Yi; 

9. Lord of Jibei-~-Bao Xin; 

.10. Governor of Beihai-~-Kong Rong; 

.11. Governor of Guangling -~-Zhang Chao; 
12. Imperial Protector of Xuzhou Region-~-Tao Qian; 
13. Governor of Xiliang-~-Ma Teng; 

14. Governor of Beiping-~-Gongsun Zan; 

15. Governor of Shangdang-~-Zhang Yang; 

16. Governor of Changsha-~-Sun Jian; 

17. Governor of Bohai-~-Yuan Shao. 


These contingents varied in size, from ten thousand to thirty thousand, but each 
was complete in itself with its officers, civil and military, and battle-leaders. They 
were heading for Capital Luoyang. 

The Governor of Beiping, Gongsun Zan, while on his way with his force of fifteen 
thousand, passed through the county of Pingyuan. There he saw among the 
mulberry trees a yellow flag under which marched a small company. When they 
drew nearer he saw the leader was Liu Bei. 

"Good brother, what do you here?" asked Gongsun Zan. 

"You were kind to me once, and on your recommendation | was made the 
magistrate of this county. | heard you were passing through and came to salute 
you. May | pray you, my elder brother, enter into the city and rest your steed?" 

"Who are these two?" said Gongsun Zan, pointing to Liu Bei's brothers. 

"These are Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, my sworn brothers." 


"Were they fighting with you against the Yellow Scarves rebels?" asked 
Gongsun Zan. 


"All my success was due to their efforts," said Liu Bei. 
"And what offices do they fill?" 


"Guan Yu is a mounted archer; Zhang Fei is a foot archer." 


"Thus are able humans buried!" said Gongsun Zan, sighing. Then he continued. 
"All the highest in the land are now going to destroy the rebellious Dong Zhuo. My 
brother, you would do better to abandon this petty place and join us in restoring the 
House of Han. Why not?" 


"| should like to go," said Liu Bei. 


"If you had let me kill him that other time, you would not have this trouble today," 
said Zhang Fei to Liu Bei and Guan Yu. 


"Since things are so, let us pack and go," said Guan Yu. 


So without more ado, the three brothers, with a few horsemen, joined Gongsun 
Zan and marched with him to join the great army. 


One after another the feudal lords came up and encamped. Their camps 
extended over seventy miles and more. When all had arrived, Cao Cao, as the 
head, prepared sacrificial bullocks and horses and called all the lords to a great 
assembly to decide upon their plan of attack. 


Then spoke the Governor of Henei, Wang Kuang, "We have been moved by a 
noble sense of right to assemble here. Now must we first choose a chief and bind 
ourselves to obedience." 


Then said Cao Cao, "For four generations the highest offices of state have been 
filled by members of the Yuan family, and its clients and supporters are 
everywhere. As a descendant of ancient ministers of Han, Yuan Shao is a suitable 
man to be our chief lord." 


Yuan Shao again and again declined this honor. But they all said, "It must be he; 
there is no other!" 


And then he agreed. 


So the next day a three-story altar was built, and they planted about it the 
banners of all parties in five directions of space. And they set up white yaks' tails 
and golden axes and emblems of military authority and the seals of leadership 
round about. 


All being ready, the chief lord was invited to ascend the altar. Clad in ceremonial 
robes and girded with a sword, Yuan Shao reverently ascended. There he burned 
incense, made obeisance and recited the oath: 


"The House of Han has fallen upon evil days, the bands of imperial authority are 
loosened. The rebel minister, Dong Zhuo, takes advantage of the discord to work 
evil, and calamity falls upon honorable families. Cruelty overwhelms simple folks. 


We, Yuan Shao and his confederates, fearing for the safety of the imperial 
prerogatives, have assembled military forces to rescue the state. We now pledge 
ourselves to exert our whole strength and act in concord to the utmost limit of our 
powers. There must be no disconcerted or selfish action. Should any depart from 
this pledge, may he lose his life and leave no posterity. Almighty Heaven and 
Universal Earth and the enlightened spirits of our forebears, be ye our witnesses." 


The reading finished, Yuan Shao smeared the blood of the sacrifice upon his 
lips and upon the lips of those who shared the pledge. All were deeply affected by 
the ceremony and many shed tears. 


This done, the chief lord was supported down from the high place and led to his 
tent, where he took the highest place and the others arranged themselves 
according to rank and age. Here wine was served. 


Presently Cao Cao said, "It behooves us all to obey the chief we have this day 
set up, and support the state. There must be no feeling of rivalry or superiority 
based upon numbers." 


Yuan Shao replied, "Unworthy as | am, yet as elected chief | must impartially 
reward merit and punish offenses. Let each see to it that he obeys the national laws 
and the army precepts. These must not be broken." 


"Only thy commands are to be obeyed!" cried all. 


Then Yuan Shao said, "My brother, Yuan Shu, is appointed Chief of the 
Commissariat. He must see to it that the whole camp is well supplied. But the need 
of the moment is a van leader who shall go to River Si Pass and provoke a battle. 
The other forces must take up strategic positions in support." 


Then the Governor of Changsha, Sun Jian, offered himself for this service. 
"You are valiant and fierce, and equal to this service," said Yuan Shao. 


The force under Sun Jian set out and presently came to River Si Pass. The 
guard there sent a swift rider to the capital to announce to the Prime Minister the 
urgency of the situation. 


Ever since Dong Zhuo had secured his position, he had given himself up to 
luxury without stint. When the urgent news reached the adviser Li Ru, he at once 
went to his master, who much alarmed called a great council. 


Lu Bu stood forth and said, "Do not fear, my father; | look upon all the lords 
beyond the passes as so much stubble. And with the warriors of our fierce army, | 
will put every one of them to death and hang their heads at the gates of the capital." 


"With your aid | can sleep secure," said Dong Zhuo. 


But some one behind Lu Bu broke in upon his speech saying, "An ox-cleaver to 
kill a chicken! There is no need for the General to go; | will cut off their heads as 
easily as | would take a thing out of my pocket." 


Dong Zhuo looked up and his eyes rested on a stalwart man of fierce mien, lithe 
and supple as a beast. He had round head like a leopard and shoulders like an 
ape's. His name was Hua Xiong of Guanxi. Dong Zhuo rejoiced at Hua Xiong's 
bold words and at once appointed him Commander of Royal Cavaliers and gave 
him fifty thousand of horse and foot. Hua Xiong and three other generals-~-Li Su, 
Hu Zhen, and Zhao Cen-~-hastily moved toward River Si Pass. 


Among the feudal lords, Bao Xin, the Lord of Jibei, was jealous lest the chosen 
Van Leader Sun Jian should win too great honors. Wherefore Bao Xin endeavored 
to meet the foe first, and so he secretly dispatched his brother, Bao Zhong, with 
three thousand by a bye road. As soon as this small force reached the Pass, they 
offered battle. Fast reacting, Hua Xiong at the head of five hundred armored 
horsemen swept down from the Pass crying, "Flee not, rebel!" 


But Bao Zhong was afraid and turned back. Hua Xiong came on, his arm rose, 
the sword fell, and Bao Zhong was cut down from his horse. Most of Bao Zhong's 
company were captured. Bao Zhong's head was sent to the Prime Minister's 
palace. Hua Xiong was promoted to Commander in Chief. 


Sun Jian presently approached the Pass. He had four generals: Cheng Pu of 
Tuyin whose weapon was an iron-spined lance with snake-headed blade; Huang 
Gai of Lingling who wielded an iron whip; Han Dang of Lingzhi using a heavy 
saber; and Zu Mao of Wujun who fought with a pair of swords. 


Commander Sun Jian wore a helmet of fine silver wrapped round with a purple 
turban. He carried across his body his sword of ancient ingot iron and rode a 
dappled horse with flowing mane. 


Sun Jian advanced to the Pass and hailed the defenders, crying, "Helpers of a 
villain! Be quick to surrender!" 


Hua Xiong bade Hu Zhen lead five thousand out against Sun Jian. Cheng Pu 
with the snaky lance rode out from Sun Jian's side and engaged. After a very few 
bouts, Cheng Pu killed Hu Zhen on the spot by a thrust through the throat. Then 
Sun Jian gave the signal for the main army to advance. But from the Pass, Hua 
Xiong's troops rained down showers of stones, which proved too much for the 
assailants, and they retired into camp at Liangdong. Sun Jian sent the report of 
victory to Yuan Shao. 


Sun Jian also sent an urgent message for supplies to the commissary. But a 


counselor said to the Controller Yuan Shu, "This Sun Jian is a very tiger in the east. 
Should he take the capital and destroy Dong Zhuo, we should have a tiger in place 
of a wolf. Do not send him grain. Starve his troops and that will decide the fate of 
that army." 


And Yuan Shu gave ears to the detractor and sent no grain or forage. Soon Sun 
Jian's hungry soldiers showed their disaffection by indiscipline, and the spies bore 
the news to the defenders of the Pass. 


Li Ru made a plot with Hua Xiong, saying, "We will launch tonight a speedy 
attack against Sun Jian in front and rear so that we can capture him." 


Hua Xiong agreed and prepared for the attack. So the soldiers of the attacking 
force were told off and given a full meal. At dark they left the Pass and crept by 
secret paths to the rear of Sun Jian's camp. The moon was bright and the wind 
cool. They arrived about midnight and the drums beat an immediate attack. Sun 
Jian hastily donned his fighting gear and rode out. He ran straight into Hua Xiong 
and the two warriors engaged. But before they had exchanged many passes, Li 
Ru's army came up from behind and set fire to whatever would burn. 


Sun Jian's army were thrown into confusion and fled in disorder. A general 
melee ensued, and soon only Zu Mao was left at Sun Jian's side. These two broke 
through the Pass and fled. Hua Xiong coming in hot pursuit, Sun Jian took his bow 
and let fly two arrows in quick succession, but both missed. He fitted a third arrow to 
the string, but drew the bow so fiercely that it snapped. He cast the bow to the earth 
and set off at full gallop. 


Then spoke Zu Mao, "My lord's purple turban is a mark that the rebels will too 
easily recognize. Give it to me and | will wear it." 


So Sun Jian exchanged his silver helmet with the turban for his general's 
headpiece, and the two men parted, riding different ways. The pursuers looking 
only for the purple turban went after its wearer, and Sun Jian escaped along a by- 
road. 


Zu Mao, hotly pursued, then tore off the headdress which he hung on the post of 
a half-burned house as he passed and dashed into the thick woods. Hua Xiong's 
troops seeing the purple turban standing motionless dared not approach, but they 
surrounded it on every side and shot at it with arrows. Presently they discovered 
the trick, went up and seized it. 


This was the moment that Zu Mao awaited. At once he rushed forth, his two 
swords whirling about, and dashed at the leader. But Hua Xiong was too quick. 
With a loud yell, Hua Xiong slashed at Zu Mao and cut him down the horse. Hua 
Xiong and Li Ru continued the slaughter till the day broke, and they led their troops 
back to the Pass. 


Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, and Han Dang in time found their chief and the soldiers 
gathered. Sun Jian was much grieved at the loss of Zu Mao. 


When news of the disaster reached Yuan Shao, he was greatly chagrined and 
called all the lords to a council. They assembled and Gongsun Zan was the last to 
arrive. When all were seated in the tent Yuan Shao said, "The brother of General 
Bao Xin, disobeying the rules we made for our guidance, rashly went to attack the 
enemy; he was slain and with him many of our soldiers. Now Sun Jian has been 
defeated. Thus our fighting spirit has suffered and what is to be done?" 


Every one was silent. Lifting his eyes, Yuan Shao looked round from one to 
another till he came to Gongsun Zan, and then he remarked three men who stood 
behind Gongsun Zan's seat. They were of striking appearance as they stood there, 
all three smiling cynically. 


"Who are those men behind you?" said Yuan Shao. 


Gongsun Zan told Liu Bei to come forward, and said, "This is Liu Bei, Magistrate 
of Pingyuan and a brother of mine who shared my humble cottage when we were 
students." 


"It must be the Liu Bei who broke up the Yellow Scarves rebellion," said Cao 
Cao. 


"It is he," said Gongsun Zan, and he ordered Liu Bei to make his obeisance to 
the assembly, to whom Liu Bei then related his services and his origin, all in full 
detail. 


"Since he is of the Han line, he should be seated," said Yuan Shao, and he bade 
Liu Bei sit. 


Liu Bei modestly thanked him, declining. 


Said Yuan Shao, "This consideration is not for your fame and office; | respect 
you as a scion of the imperial family." 


So Liu Bei took his seat in the lowest place of the long line of lords. And his two 
brothers with folded arms took their stations behind him. 


Even as they were at this meeting came in a scout to say that Hua Xiong with a 
company of mail-clad horsemen was coming down from the Pass. They were 
flaunting Sun Jian's captured purple turban on the end of a bamboo pole. The 
enemy was soon hurling insults at those within the stockade and challenging them 
to fight. 


"Who dares go out to give battle?" said Yuan Shao. 
"| will go," said Yu She, a renown general of Yuan Shu, stepping forward. 


So Yu She went, and almost immediately one came back to say that Yu She had 
fallen in the third bout of Hua Xiong. 


Fear began to lay its cold hand on the assembly. Then Imperial Protector Han Fu 
said, "| have a brave warrior among my army. Pan Feng is his name, and he could 
slay this Hua Xiong." 

So Pan Feng was ordered out to meet the foe. With his great battle-ax in his 
hand, Pan Feng mounted and rode forth. But soon came the direful tidings that 
General Pan Feng too had fallen. The faces of the gathering paled at this. 

"What a pity my two able generals, Yan Liang and Wen Chou, are not here! 
Then should we have some one who would not fear this Hua Xiong," said Yuan 
Shao. 


He had not finished when from the lower end a voice tolled, "I will go, take Hua 
Xiong's head, and lay it before you here." 


All turned to look at the speaker. He was tall and had a long beard. His eyes 
were those of a phoenix and his eyebrows thick and bushy like silkworms. His face 
was a swarthy red and his voice deep as the sound of a great bell. 

"Who is he?" asked Yuan Shao. 

Gongsun Zan told them it was Guan Yu, brother of Liu Bei. 

"And what is he?" asked Yuan Shao. 


"He is in the train of Liu Bei as a mounted archer." 


"What! An insult to us all!" roared Yuan Shu from his place. "Have we no leader? 
How dare an archer speak thus before us? Let us beat him forth!" 


But Cao Cao intervened. "Peace, O Yuan Shu! Since this man speaks great 
words, he is certainly valiant. Let him try. If he fails, then we may reproach him." 


"Hua Xiong will laugh at us if we send a mere archer to fight him," said Yuan 
Shao. 


"This man looks no common person. And how can the enemy know he is but a 
bowman?" said Cao Cao. 


"If | fail, then can you take my head," spoke Guan Yu. 


Cao Cao bade them heat some wine and offered a cup to Guan Yu as he went 
out. 


"Pour it out," said Guan Yu. "I shall return in a little space." 


Guan Yu went with his weapon in his hand and vaulted into the saddle. Those in 
the tent heard the fierce roll of the drums and then a mighty sound as if skies were 
falling and earth rising, hills trembling and mountains tearing asunder. And they 
were sore afraid. And while they were listening with ears intent, lo! the gentle tinkle 
of horse bells, and Guan Yu returned, throwing at their feet the head of the slain 
leader, their enemy Hua Xiong. 


The wine was still warm! 


This doughty deed has been celebrated in verse: 


The power of the man stands first in all the world; 

At the gate of the camp was heard the rolling of the battle drums; 

Then Guan Yu set aside the wine cup till he should have displayed his 
valor, 

And the wine was still warm when Hua Xiong had been slain. 


Cao Cao was greatly excited at this success. But Zhang Fei's voice was heard, 
shouting, "My brother has slain Hua Xiong. What are we waiting for? Why not break 
through the Pass and seize Dong Zhuo? Could there have been a better time?" 


Again arose the angry voice of Yuan Shu, "We high officials are too meek and 
yielding. Here is the petty follower of a small magistrate daring to flaunt his prowess 
before us! Expel him from the tent, | say." 


But again Cao Cao interposed, "Shall we consider the station of him who has 
done a great service?" 


"If you hold a mere magistrate in such honor, then | simply withdraw," said Yuan 
Shu. 


"Is a word enough to defeat a grand enterprise?" said Cao Cao. 
Then he told Gongsun Zan to lead the three brothers back to their own camp, 


and the other chiefs then dispersed. That night Cao Cao secretly sent presents of 
meat and wine to soothe the three after this adventure. 


When Hua Xiong's troops straggled back and told the story of defeat and death, 
Li Ru was greatly distressed. He wrote urgent letters to his master who called in his 
trusted advisers to a council. 


Li Ru summed up the situation, saying, "We have lost our best leader, and the 
rebel power has thereby become very great. Yuan Shao is at the head of this 
confederacy, and his uncle, Yuan Wei, is holder of the office of Imperial 
Guardianship. If those in the capital combine with those in the country, we may 
suffer. Therefore we must remove them. So | request you, Sir Prime Minister, to 
place yourself at the head of your army and break this confederation." 


Dong Zhuo agreed and at once ordered his two generals, Li Jue and Guo Si, to 
take five hundred troops and surround the residence of Imperial Guardian Yuan 
Wei, slay every soul regardless of age, and hang the head of Yuan Wei outside the 
gate as trophy. And Dong Zhuo commanded two hundred thousand troops to 
advance in two armies. The first fifty thousand were under Li Jue and Guo Si, and 
they were to hold River Si Pass. They should not necessarily fight. The other one 
hundred fifty thousand under Dong Zhuo himself went to Tiger Trap Pass. His 
counselors and commanders-~-Li Ru, Lu Bu, Fan Chou, Zhang Ji, and others-~- 
marched with the main army. 


Tiger Trap Pass is fifteen miles from Capital Luoyang. As soon as they arrived, 
Dong Zhuo bade Lu Bu take thirty thousand soldiers and make a strong stockade 
on the outside of the Pass. The main body with Dong Zhuo would occupy the Pass. 


News of this movement reaching the confederate lords. Yuan Shao summoned 
a council. 


Said Cao Cao, "The occupation of the Pass would cut our armies in two; 
therefore, must we oppose Dong Zhuo's army on the way." 


So eight of the commanders-~-Wang Kuang, Qiao Mao, Bao Xin, Yuan Yi, Kong 
Rong, Zhang Yang, Tao Qian, and Gongsun Zan-~-were ordered to go in the 
direction of the Tiger Trap Pass to oppose their enemy. Cao Cao and his troops 
moved among them as reserve to render help where needed. 


Of the eight, Wang Kuang, the Governor of Henei, was the first to arrive, and Lu 
Bu went to give battle with three thousand armored horsemen. When Wang Kuang 
had ordered his army, horse and foot, in battle array, he took his station under the 
great banner and looked over at his foe. 


Lu Bu was a conspicuous figure in front of the line. On his head was a triple 
curved headdress of ruddy gold with pheasant tails. He wore a warring velvet-red 
robe of Xichuan silk embroidered with thousand flowers, which was overlapped by 
golden mail adorned with a gaping animal's head, joined by rings at the sides and 
girt to his waist with a belt fastened by a beautiful lion-head clasp. His bow and 


arrows were slung on his shoulders, and he carried a long heavy trident halberd. 
He was seated on his snorting steed Red-Hare. Indeed Lu Bu was the man among 
humans, as Red-Hare was the horse among horses. 


"Who dares go out to fight him?" asked Wang Kuang turning to those behind 
him. 


In response a valiant general from Henei named Fang Yue spurred to the front, 
his spear set ready for battle. Lu Bu and Fang Yue met: before the fifth bout Fang 
Yue fell under a thrust of the trident halberd, and Lu Bu dashed forward. Wang 
Kuang's troops could not stand and scattered in all directions. Lu Bu went to and fro 
slaying all he met. He was irresistible. 


Luckily, two other troops led by Qiao Mao and Yuan Yi came up and rescued the 
wounded Wang Kuang, and Lu Bu pulled back. The three, having lost many troops, 
withdrew ten miles and made a stockade. And before long the remaining five 
commanders came up and joined them. They held a council and agreed Lu Bu was 
a hero no one could match. 


And while they sat there anxious and uncertain, it was announced that Lu Bu 
had returned to challenge them. They mounted their horses and placed themselves 
at the heads of eight forces, each body in its station on the high ground. Around 
them was the opposing army in formation, commanded by Lu Bu, innumerable 
horse and foot, with splendid embroidered banners waving in the breeze. 


They attacked Lu Bu. Mu Shun, a general of Governor Zhang Yang, rode out 
with his spear set, but soon fell at the first encounter with Lu Bu. This frightened the 
others. Then galloped forth Wu Anguo, a general under Governor Kong Rong. Wu 
Anguo raised his iron mace ready at his rival. Lu Bu whirling his halberd and 
urging on his steed came to meet Wu Anguo. The two fought, well matched for ten 
bouts, when a blow from the trident halberd broke Wu Anguo's wrist. Letting his 
mace fall to the ground he fled. Then all eight of the lords led forth their armies to 
his rescue, and Lu Bu retired to his line. 


The fighting then ceased, and after their return to camp another council met. Cao 
Cao said, "No one can stand against the prowess of Lu Bu. Let us call up all the 
lords and evolve some good plan. If only Lu Bu were taken, Dong Zhuo could 
easily be killed." 


While the council was in progress again came Lu Bu to challenge them, and 
again the commanders moved out against him. This time Gongsun Zan, flourishing 
his spear, went to meet the enemy. After a very few bouts Gongsun Zan turned and 
fled; Lu Bu following at the topmost speed of Red-Hare. Red-Hare was a five- 
hundred-mile-a-day horse, swift as the wind. The lords watched Red-Hare gained 
rapidly upon the flying horseman, and Lu Bu's halberd was poised ready to strike 
Gongsun Zan just behind the heart. Just then dashed in a third rider with round 


glaring eyes and a bristling mustache, and armed with a ten-foot octane-serpent 
halberd. 


"Stay, O twice bastard!" roared he, "I, Zhang Fei of Yan, await you." 


Seeing this opponent, Lu Bu left the pursuit of Gongsun Zan and engaged the 
new adversary. Zhang Fei was elated, and he rode forth with all his energies. They 
two were worthily matched, and they exchanged half a hundred bouts with no 
advantage to either side. Then Guan Yu, impatient, rode out with his huge and 
weighty green-dragon saber and attacked Lu Bu on the other flank. The three 
steeds formed a triangle and their riders battered away at each other for thirty 
bouts, yet still Lu Bu stood firm. 


Then Liu Bei rode out to his brothers' aid, his double swords raised ready to 
strike. The steed with the flowing mane was urged in at an angle, and now Lu Bu 
had to contend with three surrounding warriors at whom he struck one after 
another, and they at him, the flashing of the warriors' weapons looking like the 
revolving lamps suspended at the new year. And the warriors of the eight armies 
gazed rapt with amazement at such a battle. 


But Lu Bu's guard began to weaken and fatigue seized him. Looking hard in the 
face of Liu Bei, Lu Bu feigned a fierce thrust thus making Liu Bei suddenly draw 
back. Then, lowering his halberd, Lu Bu dashed through the angle thus opened 
and got away. 


But was it likely they would allow him to escape? They whipped their steeds and 
followed hard. The soldiers of the eight armies cracked their throats with 
thunderous cheers and all dashed forward, pressing after Lu Bu as he made for the 
shelter of the Tiger Trap Pass. And first among his pursuers were the three 
brothers. 


An ancient poet has told of this famous fight in these lines: 


The fateful day of Han came in the reigns of Huan and Ling, 
Their glory declined as the sun sinks at the close of day. 

Dong Zhuo, infamous minister of state, pulled down the youthful Bian. 
It is true the new Xian was a weakling, too timid for his times. 
Then Cao Cao proclaimed abroad these wicked deeds, 

And the great lords, moved with anger, assembled their forces. 

In council met they and chose as their oath-chief Yuan Shao, 
Pledged themselves to maintain the ruling house and tranquillity. 
Of the warriors of that time matchless Lu Bu was the boldest. 

His valor and prowess are sung by all within the four seas. 

He clothed his body in silver armor like the scales of a dragon, 
On his head was a golden headdress with pheasant tails, 


jaws, 


About his waist a shaggy belt, the clasp, two wild beasts' heads with gripping 


His flowing, embroidered robe fluttered about his form, 

His swift courser bounded over the plain, a mighty wind following, 

His terrible trident halberd flashed in the sunlight, bright as a placid lake. 
Who dared face him as he rode forth to challenge? 

The bowels of the confederate lords were torn with fear and their hearts 


trembled. 


Then leaped forth Zhang Fei, the valiant warrior of the north, 
Gripped in his mighty hand the long octane-serpent halberd, 

His mustache bristled with anger, standing stiff like wire. 

His round eyes glared, lightning flashes darted from them. 
Neither quailed in the fight, but the issue was undecided. 

Guan Yu stood out in front, his soul vexed within him, 

His green-dragon saber shone white as frost in the sunlight, 

His bright colored fighting robe fluttered like butterfly wings, 
Demons and angels shrieked at the thunder of his horse hoofs, 
In his eyes was fierce anger, a fire to be quenched only in blood. 
Next Liu Bei joined the battle, gripping his twin sword blades, 
The heavens themselves trembled at the majesty of his wrath. 
These three closely beset Lu Bu and long drawn out was the battle, 
Always he warded their blows, never faltering a moment. 

The noise of their shouting rose to the sky, and the earth reechoed it, 
The heat of battle ranged to the frozen pole star. 

Worn out, feeling his strength fast ebbing, Lu Bu thought to flee, 
He glanced at the hills around and thither would fly for shelter, 
Then, reversing his halberd and lowering its lofty point, 

Hastily he fled, loosing himself from the battle; 

With head low bent, he gave the rein to his courser, 

Turned his face away and fled to Tiger Trap Pass. 


The three brothers maintained the pursuit to the Pass. Looking up they saw an 
immense umbrella of black gauze fluttering in the west wind. 


"Certainly there is Dong Zhuo," cried Zhang Fei. "What is the use of pursuing Lu 
Bu? Better far seize the chiefest rebel and so pluck up the evil by the roots." 


And he whipped up his steed toward the Pass. 


To quell rebellion seize the leader if you can; 
If you need a wondrous service then first find a wondrous man. 


The following chapters will unfold the result of the battle. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 6: 
Burning The Capital, Dong Zhuo Commits An Atrocity; 
Hiding The Imperial Hereditary Seal, Sun Jian Breaks Faith. 


Zhang Fei rode hard up to the Pass, but the defenders sent down stones and 
arrows like rain so that he could not enter, and he returned. The eight lords all 
joined in felicitations to the three brothers for their services, and the story of victory 
was sent to Yuan Shao, who ordered Sun Jian to make an immediate advance. 


Thereupon Sun Jian with two trusty generals, Cheng Pu and Huang Gai, went 
over to the camp of Yuan Shu. Tracing figures on the ground with his staff, Sun Jian 
said, "Dong Zhuo and | had no personal quarrel. Yet now | have thrown myself into 
the battle regardless of consequences, exposed my person to the risk of wounds 
and fought bloody battles to their bitter end. And why? That | might be the means of 
ridding my country of a rebel and-~-for the private advantage of your family. Yet 
you, heeding the slanderous tongue of certain counselor, formerly withheld the 
supplies absolutely necessary to me, and so | suffered defeat. How can you 
explain, General?" 


Yuan Shu, confused and frightened, had no word to reply. He ordered the death 
of the slanderer to placate Sun Jian. 


Then suddenly they told Sun Jian, "Some officer has come riding down from the 
Pass to see you, General; he is in the camp." 


Sun Jian therefore took his leave and returned to his own camp, where he found 
the visitor was Li Jue, one of the much trusted commanders of Dong Zhuo. 


"Wherefore come you?" said Sun Jian. 


Li Jue replied, "You are the one person for whom my master has respect and 


admiration, and he sends me to arrange a matrimonial alliance between the two 
families. He wishes that his daughter may become the wife of your son." 


"What! Dong Zhuo, that rebel and renegade, that subverter of the throne! | wish | 
could destroy his nine generations as a thank-offering to the empire! Think you | 
would be willing to have an alliance with such a family? | will not slay you as | 
ought, but go, and go quickly! Yield the Pass and | may spare your lives. If you 
delay, | will grind your bones to powder and make mincemeat of your flesh." 


Li Jue threw his arms over his head and ran out. He returned to his master and 
told him what a rude reception he had met with. Dong Zhuo asked his adviser Li Ru 
how to reply to this. 


Li Ru said, "Lu Bu's late defeat had somewhat blunted the edge of our army's 
desire for battle. It would be well to return to the capital and remove the Emperor to 
Changan, as the street children had been lately singing: 


"A Han on the west, a Han on the east. 
The deer will be safe in Changan." 


Li Ru continued, "If you think out this couplet, it applies to the present juncture. 
Half the first line refers to the founder of the dynasty, Liu Bang the Supreme 
Ancestor, who became ruler in the western city of Changan, which was the capital 
during twelve reigns. The other half corresponds to Liu Xiu the Latter Han Founder 
who ruled from Luoyang, the eastern capital during twelve latter reigns. The 
revolution of the heavens brings us back to this starting moment. Thus if you 
remove to Changan, there will be no need for anxiety." 


Dong Zhuo was exceedingly pleased and said, "Had you not spoken thus, | 
should not have understood!" 


Then taking Lu Bu with him, Dong Zhuo started at once for Capital Luoyang. 
Here he called all the officials to a great council in the palace and addressed them, 
"After two centuries of rule here the royal fortune has been exhausted, and | 
perceive that the aura of rule has migrated to Changan, whither | now desire to 
move the court. All you would better pack up for the journey." 


Yang Biao, Minister of the Interior, said, "| pray you reflect. Within that city all is 
destruction. There is no reason to renounce the ancestral temples and abandon 
the imperial tombs here. | fear the people will be alarmed. It is easy to alarm them 
but difficult to pacify them." 


"Do you oppose the state plans?" said Dong Zhuo angrily. 


Another official, Grand Commander Huang Wan, supported his colleague, "In 
the era of Recommencement (AD 23-25), Fan Chong of the Red Eyebrows rebels 
burned Changan to the ground and reduced the place to broken tiles. The 
inhabitants scattered all but a few. It is wrong to abandon these palaces here for a 
wasteland." 


Dong Zhuo replied, "The East of the Pass is full of sedition, and all the empire is 
in rebellion. The city of Changan is protected by the Yaohan Mountains and the 
Hangu Pass. Moreover, it is near Longyou, whence can be easily brought timber, 
stone, brick, and building materials. In a month or so palaces can be erected. So an 
end to your wild words!" 


Yet Minister of Works Xun Shuang raised another protest against disturbing the 
people, but Dong Zhuo overbore him also. 


"How can | stop to consider a few common people when my scheme affects the 
empire?" said Dong Zhuo. 


That day the three objectors-~-Yang Biao, Huang Wan, and Xun Shuang-~-were 
removed from their offices and reduced to the rank of commoners. 


As Dong Zhuo went out to get into his coach, he met two other officers who 
made obeisance. They were the Secretary General, Zhou Bi, and the Commander 
of the City Gate, Wu Qiong. Dong Zhuo stopped and asked them what they wanted. 


Said Zhou Bi, "We venture to try to dissuade you from moving the capital to 
Changan." 


Dong Zhuo replied, "They used to say you two were supporters of Yuan Shao; 
now he has already turned traitor and you are of the same party." 


And without more ado he bade his guards take both outside the city and put 
them to death. The command to remove to the new capital immediately was issued. 
Speaking to Dong Zhuo, Li Ru pointed out, "We are short of money and food, and 
the rich people of Luoyang could be easily plundered. This is a good occasion to 
link them to the rebels and to confiscate their properties." 


Dong Zhuo sent five thousand troops out to plunder and slay. They captured 
many thousand wealthy householders and, having stuck flags on their heads 
saying they were "Traitors and Rebels," drove them out of the city and put them to 
death. Their properties were all seized. 


The task of driving forth the inhabitants, some millions, was given to two of Dong 
Zhuo's commanders, Li Jue and Guo Si. The people were sent off in bands, each 
band between two parties of soldiers, who drove them forward Changan. 
Enormous numbers fell by the road side and died in the ditches, and the escort 


plundered the fugitives and defiled the women. A wail of sorrow arose to the very 
sky. 


Dong Zhuo's final orders as he left Capital Luoyang were to burn the whole city; 
houses, palaces, temples, and everything was devoured by the flames. The capital 
became but a patch of scorched earth. 


Dong Zhuo sent Lu Bu to desecrate the tombs of the emperors and their 
consorts for the jewels therein, and the common soldiers took the occasion to dig 
up the graves of officers and plunder the cemeteries of the wealthy. The spoil of the 
city, gold and silver, pearls and silks, and beautiful ornaments, filled many carts. 
With these and the persons of the Emperor and his household, Dong Zhuo moved 
off to the new capital in the first year of Inauguration of Tranquillity (AD 190). 


Luoyang being thus abandoned, the general of Dong Zhuo at River Si Pass, 
Zhao Cen, evacuated that post of vantage, which Sun Jian at once occupied. Liu 
Bei and his brothers took Tiger Trap Pass and the confederate lords advanced. 


Sun Jian hastened to the late capital which was still in flames. When he arrived, 
dense smoke hung all over it and spread for miles around. No living thing, not a 
fowl, or a dog, or a human being, remained. Sun Jian told off his soldiers to 
extinguish the fires and set out camping places for the confederate lords. 


Cao Cao went to see Yuan Shao and said, "Dong Zhuo has gone west; we 
ought to follow and attack his rear without loss of time; why do you remain 
inactive?" 


"All our colleagues are worn out, and there is nothing to be gained by attack," 
said Yuan Shao. 


Cao Cao said, "This moment was most propitious in the utter confusion that 
reigned, palaces burned, the Emperor abducted, the whole world upset, and no 
one knowing whither to turn. The villain will soon be ended, and a single blow 
could exterminate Dong Zhuo. Why not pursue?" 


But all the confederate lords seemed of one mind, and that mind was to 
postpone action. So they did nothing. 


"Those unworthy ones cannot discuss worthy thing," cried Cao Cao. 


Then, he and his six generals-~-Xiahou Dun, Xiahou Yuan, Cao Ren, Cao 
Hong, Li Dian, and Yue Jin-~-and ten thousand troops started in pursuit. 


The road to the new capital led through Yingyang. When Dong Zhuo reached it, 
Governor Xu Rong went to welcome the cavalcade. 


Li Ru said, "As there is some danger of pursuit, it would be well to order the 
Governor of this place to lay an ambush outside the city. He is to let the pursuers 
pass and be ready to cut off their retreat, when our army beats them off. That will 
teach any others not to follow." 


Then Dong Zhuo ordered Lu Bu to command the rear guard. Very soon they saw 
Cao Cao coming up, and Lu Bu laughed at his colleague's foresight. He set out his 
troops in fighting order. 


Cao Cao rode forward, crying, "Rebels, abductors, drovers of the people, where 
are you going?" 


Lu Bu replied, "Treacherous simpleton, what mad words are these?" 


Then from Cao Cao army rode forth Xiahou Dun with his spear set, and Lu Bu 
and Xiahou Dun engaged. The combat had hardly begun when Li Ru with a cohort 
came in from the left. Cao Cao bade Xiahou Yuan meet this onslaught. However, 
on the other side appeared Guo Si and his company. Cao Cao sent Cao Ren 
against Guo Si. The onrush on three sides was too much to withstand, and Lu Bu's 
army was overwhelming, so Xiahou Dun had to retire to the main line. Thereupon 
Lu Bu's armored troops attacked and completed the defeat. The beaten army of 
Cao Cao turned toward Yingyang. 


They got as far as the foot of a hill in the evening about the second watch, and 
the moon made it as light as day. Here they halted to reform. Just as they were 
burying the boilers to prepare a meal, there arose a great noise of shouting on all 
sides and out came the troops of Governor Xu Rong from the ambush fresh to 
attack. 


Cao Cao, thrown into a flurry, mounted and fled. He ran right in the way of the 
waiting Xu Rong. Then he dashed off in another direction, but Xu Rong shot an 
arrow after him which struck him in the shoulder. The arrow still in the wound, Cao 
Cao fled for his life. As he went over the hill, two soldiers lying in wait among the 
grass suddenly dashed out and wounded his horse, which fell and rolled over. And 
as he slipped from the saddle, he was seized and made prisoner. 


Just then a horseman came, riding at full soeed and whirling his sword up, cut 
down both the captors, and rescued Cao Cao. It was Cao Hong. 


Cao Cao said, "| am doomed, Good Brother; go and save yourself!" 
"My lord, mount my horse quickly; | will go afoot," said Cao Hong. 
"If those wretches come up, what then?" said Cao Cao. 


"The world can do without Cao Hong, but not without you, my lord!" 


"If | live, | shall owe you my life," said Cao Cao. 


So he mounted. Cao Hong tore off his own breastplate, gripped his sword and 
went on foot after the horse. Thus they proceeded till the fourth watch when they 
saw before them a broad stream, and behind they still heard the shouts of pursuers 
drawing nearer and nearer. 


"This is my fate;" said Cao Cao, "| am really doomed." 


Cao Hong helped Cao Cao down from his horse. Then taking off his fighting 
robe and helmet, Cao Hong took the wounded man on his back and waded into the 
stream. When they reached the further side, the pursuers had already gained the 
bank whence they shot arrows. 


Cao Cao all wet pushed on. Dawn was near. They went on another ten miles 
and then sat down to rest under a precipice. Suddenly loud shouting was heard 
and a party of horse appeared. It was Governor Xu Rong who had forded the river 
higher up. Just at this moment Xiahou Dun and Xiahou Yuan, with several dozens 
men, came along. 


"Hurt not my lord!" cried Xiahou Dun to Xu Rong, who at once rushed at him. 


But the combat was short. Xu Rong speedily fell under a spear thrust of Xiahou 
Dun, and his troops were driven off. Before long Cao Cao's other generals arrived. 
Sadness and joy mingled in the greetings. They gathered together the few 
hundreds of soldiers left and then returned to Luoyang. 


When the confederate lords entered Luoyang, Sun Jian, after extinguishing the 
fires, camped within the walls, his own tent being set up near the Dynastic Temple. 
His people cleared away the debris and closed the rifted tombs. The gates were 
barred. On the site of the Dynastic Temple he put up a mat shed containing three 
apartments, and here he begged the lords to meet and replace the sacred tablets, 
with solemn sacrifices and prayers. 


This ceremony over, the others left and Sun Jian returned to his camp. That night 
the stars and moon vied with each other in brightness. As Sun Jian sat in the open 
air looking up at the heavens, he noticed a mist spreading over the stars of the 
Constellation Draco. 


"The Emperor's star is dulled," said Sun Jian with a sigh. "No wonder a 
rebellious minister disturbs the state, the people sit in dust and ashes, and the 
capital is a waste." 


And his tears began to fall. 


Then a soldier pointing to the south said, "There is a beam of colored light rising 
from a well." 


Sun Jian bade his people light torches and descend into the well. Soon they 
brought up the corpse of a woman, not in the least decayed although it had been 
there many days. She was dressed in palace clothing and from her neck hung an 
embroidered bag. Opening this a red box was found, with a golden lock, and when 
the box was opened, they saw a jade seal, square in shape, an inch each way. On 
it were delicately engraved five dragons intertwined. One corner had been broken 
off and repaired with gold. There were eight characters in the seal style of 
engraving which interpreted read, "| have received the command from Heaven: 
may my time be always long and prosperous." 


Sun Jian showed this to his adviser, General Cheng Pu, who at once recognized 
it as the Imperial Hereditary Seal of the Emperor. 


Cheng Pu said, "This seal has a history. In olden days Bian He saw a phoenix 
sitting on a certain stone at the foot of the Jing Mountains. He offered the stone at 
court. The king of Chu split open the stone and found a piece of jade. In the twenty- 
sixth year of Qin Dynasty (BC 221), a jade cutter made a seal from it, and Li Si, the 
First Emperor's Prime Minister, engraved the characters. Two years later, while the 
First Emperor was sailing in the Dongting Lake, a terrific storm arrived. The 
Emperor threw the seal to the water as a propitiatory offering, and the storm 
immediately ceased. Ten years later again, when the First Emperor was making a 
progress and had reached Huaying, an old man by the road side handed a seal to 
one of the attendants saying, ‘This is now restored to the ancestral dragon,' and 
had then disappeared. Thus the jewel returned to Qin. 


"The next year the First Emperor died. Later Zi Ying, the grandson of the First 
Emperor, presented the seal to Liu Bang the Supreme Ancestor, the founder of the 
Han Dynasty. Two hundred years later, in Wang Mang's rebellion, the Emperor's 
mother, Lady Yuan, struck two of the rebels, Wang Xun and Su Xian, with the seal 
and broke off a corner, which was repaired with gold. Liu Xiu the Latter Han 
Founder got possession of it at Yiyang, and it has been regularly bequeathed 
hereafter. 


"| heard this treasured seal had been lost during the trouble in the Palace when 
the Ten Regular Attendants hurried off the Emperor. It was missed on His Majesty's 
return. Now my lord has it and certainly will come to the imperial dignity. But you 
must not remain here in the north. Quickly go home-~-Changsha, south of the Great 
River-~-where you can lay plans for the accomplishment of the great design." 


"Your words exactly accord with my thoughts," said Sun Jian. "Tomorrow | will 
make an excuse that | am unwell and get away." 


The soldiers were told to keep the discovery a secret. But one among them was 


a compatriot of the elected chief of the confederacy-~-Yuan Shao. He thought this 
might be of great advantage to him, so he stole away out of the camp and betrayed 
his master. He went to Yuan Shao's camp, informed the secret, and received a 
liberal reward. Yuan Shao kept the informant in his own camp. 


Next morning Sun Jian came to take leave, saying , "| am rather unwell and wish 
to return to Changsha." 


Yuan Shao laughed, saying, "| know what you are suffering from; it is called the 
Imperial Hereditary Seal!" 


This was a shock to Sun Jian, and he paled but said, "Whence these words?" 

Yuan Shao said, "The armies were raised for the good of the state and to relieve 
it from oppression. The seal is state property; and since you have got hold of it, you 
should publicly hand it over to me as chief. When Dong Zhuo has been slain, it 
must go back to the government. What do you mean by concealing it and going 
away" 

"How could the seal get into my hands?" said Sun Jian. 

"Where is the article out of the well?" 

"| have it not; why harass me thus?" 


"Quickly produce it, or it will be the worst for you." 


Sun Jian pointing toward the heavens as an oath said, "If | have this jewel and 
am hiding it myself, may my end be unhappy and my death violent!" 


The lords all said, "After an oath like this we think he cannot have it." 
Then Yuan Shao called out his informant. 


"When you pulled that thing out of the well, was this man there?" asked he of 
Sun Jian. 


Sun Jian's anger burst forth, and he sprang forward to kill the man. Yuan Shao 
also drew his sword, saying, "You touch that soldier and it is an insult to me." 


Behind Sun Jian, Generals Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, and Han Dang stepped forth; 
behind Yuan Shao, Generals Yan Liang and Wen Chou were ready to act. Ina 
moment on all sides swords flew from their scabbards. But the confusion was 
stayed by the efforts of the others, and Sun Jian left the assembly. Soon he broke 
up his camp and marched to his own place. 


Yuan Shao was not satisfied. He wrote to Jingzhou and sent the letter by a trusty 
hand to tell Imperial Protector Liu Biao to stop Sun Jian and take away the seal. 


Just after this came the news of the defeat and misfortune of Cao Cao, and when 
he was coming home, Yuan Shao sent out to welcome him and conduct him into 
camp. They also prepared a feast to console him. 


During the feast Cao Cao said sadly, "My object was for the public good, and all 
you gentlemen nobly supported me. My plan was to get Yuan Shao with his Henei 
troops to approach Mengching; and my force at Qiao to keep Chenggao; while the 
others of you to hold Suanzao, to close the passes of Huanyuan and Daigu, and to 
take possession of the granaries, to control the points of vantage, and thus to 
secure the Capital District. | planned for Yuan Shu with his Nanyang army to 
occupy the counties of Danshi and Xilin and go into Wu Pass to help the three 
supports. All were to fortify their positions and not fight. Advantage lay in an 
uncertain military force showing the empire's possibilities of dealing with the 
rebellion. Victory would have been ours at once. But then came delays and doubts 
and inaction, and the confidence of the people was lost, and | am ashamed." 


No reply was possible and the guests dispersed. Cao Cao saw that the others 
mistrusted him and in his heart knew that nothing could be accomplished. So he 
led off his force to Yanzhou. 


Then Gongsun Zan said to Liu Bei, "This Yuan Shao is an incapable, and things 
will turns chaotic. We would better go too." 


So he broke camp and went north. At Pingyuan he left Liu Bei in command and 
went to strengthen his own position and refresh his troops. 


The Imperial Protector of Yanzhou, Liu Dai, wished to borrow grain of the 
Governor of Dongjun, Qiao Mao. Being denied, Liu Dai attacked the camp, killed 
Qiao Mao and took over all his army. Yuan Shao seeing the confederacy breaking 
up also marched away and went east. 


On the way home, Sun Jian was passing through Jingzhou. The Imperial 
Protector of Jingzhou, Liu Biao, was a scion of the imperial house and a native of 
Shanyang. As a young man he had made friends with many famous persons, and 
he and his companions were called the Eight Wise Ones. The other seven were: 


.1. Chen Xiang from Runan; 
.2. Fan Pang from Runan; 

.38. Kong Yu from Luting; 

.4. Fan Kang from Bohai; 

.5. Tan Fu from Shanyang; 

.6. Zhang Jian from Shanyang; 


.7. Cen Zhi from Nanyang. 


Liu Biao was friends with all these. He had three famous persons who helped 
him in the government of his region. They were Kuai Liang and Kuai Yue from 
Yanping, and Cai Mao from Xiangyang. 


When Yuan Shao's letter detailing the fault of Sun Jian arrived, Liu Biao ordered 
Kuai Yue and Cai Mao with ten thousand soldiers to bar the way. When Sun Jian 
drew near, the force was arranged in fighting order and the leaders were in the 
front. 


"Why are you thus barring the road with armed troops?" asked Sun Jian. 


"Why do you, a servant of Han, secrete the Emperor's special seal? Leave it with 
me at once and you go free," said Kuai Yue. 


Sun Jian angrily ordered out General Huang Gai. On the other side Cai Mao 
rode forth with his sword set to strike. But after a few bouts Huang Gai dealt Cai 
Mao a blow with the iron whip on the armor just over the heart. Cai Mao turned his 
steed and fled, and Sun Jian got through with a sudden rush. 


However, there arose the sound of gongs and drums on the hills behind, and 
there was Liu Biao in person with a large army. Sun Jian rode straight up to him 
and bowing low spoke, "Why did you, on the faith of a letter from Yuan Shao, try to 
coerce the chief of a neighboring region?" 


"You have concealed the state jewel, and | want you to restore it," was Liu Biao's 
reply. 


"If | have this thing, may | die a violent death!" 

"If you want me to believe you, let me search your baggage." 

"What force have you that you dare come to flout me thus?" 

And only Liu Biao's prompt retirement prevented a battle. Sun Jian proceeded 
on his way. But from the rear of the second hill an ambush suddenly discovered 


itself, and Kuai Yue and Cai Mao were still pursuing. Sun Jian seemed entirely 
hemmed in. 


What does a man to hold the state jewel for, 
If its possession lead to strife? 


How Sun Jian got clear of the difficulty will presently be told. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 7: 
Yuan Shao Fights Gongsun Zan At The River Pan; 
Sun Jian Attacks Liu Biao Across The Great River. 


At the close of the last chapter Sun Jian was surrounded. However, aided by 
Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, and Han Dang, he eventually fought his way through, 
though with the loss of more than half his troops. Sun Jian he returned to the South 
Land, southeast of the Great River. Henceforward Sun Jian and Liu Biao were 
open enemies. 


Yuan Shao was in Henei. Being short of supplies, he sent to borrow from the 
Imperial Protector of Jizhou, Han Fu, whence he obtained the wherewithal to 
support his army. Then one of Yuan Shao's advisers, Peng Ji, said to him, "You are 
really the strongest power here about; why then depend upon another for food? 
Jizhou is rich and wide; why not seize it?" 


"| have no good plan," replied Yuan Shao. 
"You could secretly send a letter to Gongsun Zan, asking him to attack, 


promising him your support. Imperial Protector Han Fu of Jizhou, being incapable, 
must ask you to take over his region, and you will get it without lifting a finger." 


So the letter was sent. When Gongsun Zan saw therein the proposal to make a 
joint attack and divide the territory, he agreed to give his help. In the meantime 
Yuan Shao had sent to warn Han Fu of Gongsun Zan's threat. Han Fu sought 
advice from Advisers Xun Chang and Xin Ping. 


Xun Chang said, "Governor Gongsun Zan of Beiping is commanding a huge and 
strong army. If he came to attack us, we could not stand against him, especially if 
he had the help of Liu Bei and his brothers. At present, Yuan Shao is bolder than 
most, and he has many able and famous leaders under him. You cannot do better 
than ask him to assist in administering this region. Yuan Shao will certainly treat 
you with generosity, and you need have no fear from Gongsun Zan." 


Han Fu agreed and sent a message to Yuan Shao by the hand of Guan Chun. 


But the commander of the palace, Geng Wu, remonstrated with his master, 
saying, "Yuan Shao is a needy man with a hungry army and as dependent on us 
for existence as an infant in arms on its mother. Stop the flow of milk and the infant 
dies. Why should you hand the region over to him? It is nothing less than letting a 
tiger into the sheepfold." 


Han Fu replied, "| am one of the clients of the Yuan family, and | know the 
abilities of Yuan Shao, which is far better than mine. Why are you all so jealous? 
The ancients counseled yielding to the sage." 


Geng Wu sighed, "Jizhou is lost!" 


When the news got abroad, more than thirty officers of Jizhou left their 
employment and the city. However, Geng Wu and Guan Chun hid in the suburbs to 
await the arrival of Yuan Shao. 


They had not long to wait. Some days later, Yuan Shao with his soldiers came, 
and Geng Wu and Guan Chun tried to assassinate him with knives. This attempt 
failed. Yuan Shao's generals, Yan Liang and Wen Chou, beheaded Geng Wu and 
Guan Chun instantly. Thus both of them died, and the object of their hatred entered 
Jizhou City. 


Yuan Shao's first act was to confer on Han Fu a high sounding title-~-General 
Who Demonstrates Grand and Vigor Courage in Arms-~-, but the administration 
was entrusted to four of Yuan Shao's confidants-~-Tian Feng, Ju Shou, Xu You, 
and Peng Ji-~-who speedily deprived the Imperial Protector of all power. Full of 
chagrin, Han Fu soon abandoned all, even his family, and rode alone to take 
refuge with the Governor of Chenliu, Zhang Miao. 


Hearing of Yuan Shao's invasion, Gongsun Zan sent his brother, Gongsun Yue, 
to see the usurper and demand his share of the region. 


"| want to see your elder brother himself. He and | have things to discuss," said 
Yuan Shao. 


Thus Gongsun Yue was sent back. But after traveling some fifteen miles on the 
homeward road, Gongsun Yue saw a group of soldiers appear. 


"We are guards of Prime Minister Dong Zhuo," cried the soldiers. 


Instantly, Gongsun Yue was killed by a flight of arrows. Those of Gongsun Yue's 
followers who escaped carried the news to their late master's brother. 


Gongsun Zan was very angry and said, "Yuan Shao prevailed on me to attack, 
and now he has taken possession. Also he pretends the murderers of my brother 
were not his people. Shall | not avenge my brother's injury?" 


Gongsun Zan brought up all his force to the attack. Learning the movement, 
Yuan Shao sent out his army, and they met at River Pan. They halted on opposite 
sides of the river, over which was a bridge. Gongsun Zan took his station on the 
bridge and cried to his enemy, "Renegade, how dared you mislead me?" 


Yuan Shao rode to the other end of the bridge and, pointing at Gongsun Zan, 
replied, "Han Fu yielded place to me because he was unequal to the rule. What 
concern is it of yours?" 


Gongsun Zan replied, "Formerly you were regarded as loyal and public spirited, 
and we chose you chief of the confederacy. Now your deeds prove you cruel and 
base and wolf-hearted in behavior. How can you look the world in the face?" 


"Who will capture him?" cried Yuan Shao in a rage. 


At once Wen Chou rode out with his spear set. Gongsun Zan rode down the 
bridge to the enemy's side, where the two engaged. Ten bouts showed Gongsun 
Zan the terrible power of Wen Chou, and so he drew off. The enemy came on. 
Gongsun Zan took refuge within his formation, but Wen Chou cut his way in and 
rode this way and that, slaying right and left. The four best of Gongsun Zan's 
generals offered joint battle, but one fell under the first stroke of the doughty 
warrior, and the other three fled. Wen Chou followed clearing through to the rear of 
the army. Gongsun Zan made for the mountains. Wen Chou forced his horse to its 
utmost pace, crying hoarsely, "Down! Dismount and surrender." 


Gongsun Zan fled for life. His bow and quiver dropped from his shoulders, his 
helmet fell off, and his hair streamed straight behind him as he rode in and out 
between the sloping hills. Then his steed stumbled and he was thrown, rolling over 
and over to the foot of the slope. 


Wen Chou was now very near and poising his spear for the thrust. Then 
suddenly came out from the shelter of a grassy mound on the left a general of 
youthful mien, but sitting his steed bravely and holding a sturdy spear. He rode 
directly at Wen Chou, and Gongsun Zan crawled up the slope to look on. 


The new warrior was of middle height with bushy eyebrows and large eyes, a 
broad face and a heavy jowl, a youth of commanding presence. The two 
exchanged some fifty bouts and yet neither had the advantage. Then Gongsun 
Zan's rescue force came along, and Wen Chou turned and rode away. The youth 
did not pursue. 


Gongsun Zan hurried down the hill and asked the young fellow who he was. He 
bowed low and replied, "My name is Zhao Yun from Changshan. | first served Yuan 
Shao; but when | saw that he was disloyal to his prince and careless of the welfare 
of the people, | left him and | was on my way to offer service to you. This meeting in 
this place is most unexpected." 


Gongsun Zan was very pleased, and the two went together to the camp, where 
they at once busied themselves with preparations for a new battle. 


Next day Gongsun Zan prepared for fight by dividing his army into two wings. He 
had five thousand cavalry in the center, all mounted on white horses. Gongsun Zan 
had formerly seen service against the frontier tribes, the Qiang Peoples, where he 
always placed his white horses in the van of his army, and thus he had won the 
sobriquet of General Who Commands White Horses. The tribes held him so much 
in fear that they always fled as soon as the white horses, their sacred creatures, 
appeared. 


On Yuan Shao's side Yan Liang and Wen Chou were Leaders of the Van. Each 
had one thousand of archers and crossbowmen. They were set out half on either 
side, those on the left to shoot at Gongsun Zan's right and those on the right to 
shoot at his left. In the center was Qu Yi with eight hundred bowmen and ten 
thousand of foot and horse. Yuan Shao took command of the reserve force in the 
rear. 


In this fight Gongsun Zan employed his new adherent Zhao Yun for the first time 
and, as Gongsun Zan did not feel assured of Zhao Yun's good faith, put him in 
command of a company at the rear. The Van Leader was Yan Guang, and 
Gongsun Zan himself commanded the center. He took his place on horseback on 
the bridge beside an enormous red standard on which was displayed the word 
"Commanding General" in gold embroidery. 


From sunrise to noon the drums rolled for the attack, but Yuan Shao's army 
made no move. Qu Yi made his bowmen hide under their shields. They heard the 
roar of explosions, the whistling of arrows, and the rattle of the drums, as Yan 
Guang approached from the other side, but Qu Yi and his men lay closer than ever 


and never stirred. They waited till Yan Guang had got close on them and then, as 
the sound of a bomb rent the air, the whole eight hundred men let fly their arrows in 
a cloud. Yan Guang was quite taken aback and would have retired, but Qu Yi rode 
furiously toward him, whirled up his sword and cut him down. 


So Gongsun Zan's army lost that battle. The two wings that should have come to 
the rescue were kept back by the bowmen under Yan Liang and Wen Chou. Yuan 
Shao's troops advanced right up to the bridge. Then Qu Yi rode forward, slew the 
standard bearer, and hacked through the staff of the embroidered banner. Seeing 
this, Gongsun Zan turned his steed and galloped away. 


Qu Yi followed. But just as he caught up the fugitive, there came prancing forth 
Zhao Yun, who rode directly at him with spear ready to strike. After a few bouts Qu 
Yi was laid in the dust. Then Zhao Yun attacked the soldiers and turned the tide. 
Plunging forward on this side, dashing in on that, he went through as if there were 
no antagonists and, seeing this, Gongsun Zan turned and came again into the fight. 
The final victory was on his side. 


From the scouts sent to find out how the battle went, Yuan Shao heard the good 
news of Qu Yi's success in slaying the standard bearer, capturing the flag, and his 
pursuit. So Yuan Shao took no further care but rode out with his General Tian Feng 
and a few guards to look on at the enemy and enjoy his victory. 


"Ha ha!" Yuan Shao laughed. "Gongsun Zan is an incapable." 


But even as Yuan Shao spoke, he saw in front the redoubtable Zhao Yun. His 
guards hastened to prepare their bows, but before they could shoot, Zhao Yun was 
in their midst, and men were falling before him wherever he went. The others fled. 
Gongsun Zan's army then gathered round and hemmed in Yuan Shao. 


Tian Feng then said to his master, "Sir, take refuge in this empty building here." 


But Yuan Shao dashed his helmet to the ground, crying "The brave man rather 
faces death in the battle than seeks safety behind a wall!" 


This bold speech gave new courage to his soldiers who now fought fiercely and 
with such success that Zhao Yun could nowhere force his way in. Yuan Shao was 
soon reinforced by the arrival of his main body and Yan Liang, and the two armies 
pressed forward. Zhao Yun could only just get Gongsun Zan safe out of the press. 
Then they fought their way back to the bridge. But Yuan Shao's troops still came on 
and fought their way across the bridge, forcing multitudes of their adversaries into 
the water, where many were drowned. 


Yuan Shao was leading in person and his troops still advanced. But not more 
than two miles, for soon a great shouting was heard behind some hills, whence 
suddenly burst out a body of troops led by Liu Bei, Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei. 


At Pingyuan they had heard of the struggle between their protector and his 
enemy, Yuan Shao, and had at once set out to help. Now the three riders, each 
with his peculiar weapon, flew straight at Yuan Shao, who was so frightened that 
his soul seemed to leave his body and fly beyond the confines of heaven. 


His sword fell from his hand and he fled for his life. He was chased across the 
bridge when Gongsun Zan called in his army and they returned to camp. 


After the usual greetings Gongsun Zan said, "If you had not come to our help, we 
should have been in very bad case." 


Liu Bei and Zhao Yun were made acquainted with each other, and a warm 
affection sprang up from the very first so that they were always together. 


Yuan Shao had lost that battle, and Gongsun Zan would not risk another. They 
strengthened their defenses, and the armies lay inactive for over a month. In the 
meantime news of the fighting had reached Capital Changan, and Dong Zhuo was 
told. 


His adviser, Li Ru, went to see his master and said, "The two active leaders of 
today are Yuan Shao and Gongsun Zan, who are at grips at River Pan. Pretend 
you have an imperial command to make peace between them, and both will 
support you out of gratitude for your intervention." 


"Good!" said Dong Zhuo. So he sent the Imperial Guardian, Ma Midi, and the 
Minister of the Palace Bureau, Zhao Qi, on the mission. When these men were 
arriving the North of Yellow River, Yuan Shao sent out to welcome them thirty miles 
from his headquarters and received the imperial command with the greatest 
respect. Then the two officers went to Gongsun Zan and made known their errand. 
Gongsun Zan sent letters to his adversary proposing friendship. The two 
emissaries returned to report their task accomplished. Gongsun Zan drew off his 
army. He also sent up a memorial eulogizing Liu Bei, who was raised to the rank of 
Governor of Pingyuan. 


The farewell between Liu Bei and Zhao Yun was affecting. They held each 
other's hands a long time, their eyes streaming with tears, and could not tear 
themselves apart. 


Zhao Yun said with a sob, "| used to think Gongsun Zan a true hero, but 1 see 
now that he is no different from Yuan Shao. They are both alike." 


"But you are now in his service; we shall surely meet again," said Liu Bei. 


Both men wept freely as they separated. 


Now Yuan Shu in Nanyang, hearing that his brother had come into Jizhou, sent 
to beg a thousand horses. The request was refused and enmity sprang up between 
the brothers. Yuan Shu also sent to Jingzhou to borrow grain, which Imperial 
Protector Liu Biao would not send. In his resentment, Yuan Shu wrote to Sun Jian 
trying to get him to attack Liu Biao. The letter ran like this: 


"When Liu Biao stopped you on your way home, it was at the instigation of my 
brother. Now the same two have planned to fall upon your territories southeast of 
the Great River, wherefore you should at once strike at Liu Biao. | will capture my 
brother for you and both resentments will be appeased. You will get Jingzhou, and 
| shall have Jizhou." 


"| cannot bear Liu Biao," said Sun Jian as he finished reading this letter. "He 
certainly did bar my way home, and | may wait many years for my revenge if | let 
slip this chance." 


He called a council. 
"You may not trust Yuan Shu; he is very deceitful," said Cheng Pu. 
"| want revenge on my own part; what care | for his help?" said Sun Jian. 


He dispatched Huang Gai to prepare a river fleet, arm and provision them. Big 
warships were to take horses on board. The force soon set out. 


News of these preparations came to Liu Biao, and he hastily summoned his 
advisers and warriors. 


Kuai Liang told him to be free from anxiety, and said, "Put General Huang Zu at 
the head of the Jiangxia army to make the first attack and you, Sir, support him with 
the forces from Xiangyang. Let Sun Jian come riding the rivers and straddling the 
lakes; what strength will he have left after arriving here?" 


So Liu Biao bade Huang Zu prepare to march, and a great army was 
assembled. 


Here it may be said that Sun Jian had four sons, all the issue of his wife who was 
of the Wu family. Their names in order were Sun Ce, Sun Quan, Sun Yi, and Sun 
Kuang. Sun Jian had a second wife who was the sister of his first wife. And the 
second wife bore him a son and a daughter, the former called Sun Lang, the latter 
Sun Ren. Sun Jian had also adopted a son from the Yu family named Sun Shao. 
And he had a younger brother named Sun Jing. 


As Sun Jian was leaving on this expedition, his brother Sun Jing with all his six 
sons stood in front of Sun Jian's steed and dissuaded him, saying, "Dong Zhuo is 
the real ruler of the state, for the Emperor is a weakling. The whole country is in 


rebellion, every one is scrambling for territory. Our area is comparatively peaceful, 
and it is wrong to begin a war merely for the sake of a little resentment. | pray you, 
Brother, think before you start." 


Sun Jian replied, "Brother, say no more. | desire to make my strength felt 
throughout the empire, and shall | not avenge my injuries?" 


"Then father, if you must go, let me accompany you," said the eldest son Sun Ce. 


This request was granted, and father and son embarked to go to ravage the city 
of Fankou. 


Now Huang Zu had placed archers and crossbowmen along the river bank. 
When the ships approached, a flight of arrows met them. Sun Jian ordered his 
troops to remain under cover in the ships, which then sailed to and fro, drawing the 
fire for three days. Several times the ships pretended to land, and this drew 
showers of arrows from the bank. At last the arrows of the defenders were all shot 
away and Sun Jian, who collected them, found he had many myriads. Then with a 
fair wind Sun Jian's troops shot them back to the enemy. Those on the bank were 
thrown into great disorder and retired. The army then landed. Two divisions led by 
Cheng Pu and Huang Gai set out for Huang Zu's camp along different roads, and 
between them marched Han Dang. Under this triple attack Huang Zu was worsted. 
He left Fankou and hastened to Dengcheng. 


Leaving the ships under the command of Huang Gai, Sun Jian led the pursuing 
force. Huang Zu came out of his city and drew up for battle in the open country. 
When Sun Jian had disposed his army, he rode out to the standard. Sun Ce, clad in 
armor, placed himself beside his father. 


Huang Zu rode out with two generals-~-Zhang Hu from Jiangxia and Chen 
Sheng from Xiangyang. Flourishing his whip, Huang Zu abused his enemy, "You 
swarm of rebels from Changsha! Why do you invade the land of a scion of the 
ruling house?" 


Zhang Hu challenged to combat, and Han Dang went out to accept. The two 
champions fought thirty bouts, and then Chen Sheng, seeing his fellow general 
becoming exhausted, rode to his aid. Sun Jian saw Chen Sheng coming, laid aside 
his spear, reached for his bow, and shot an arrow wounding Chen Sheng in the 
face. He fell from his horse. Panic seized upon Zhang Hu at the fall of his comrade, 
and he could no longer defend himself. Then Han Dang with a slash of his sword 
clove Zhang Hu's skull in twain. 


Both having fallen, Cheng Pu galloped up to make prisoner of Huang Zu, who 
threw off his helmet, slipped from his steed, and mingled for safety among his 
troops. Sun Jian led on the attack and drove the enemy to the Han River where he 
ordered Huang Gai to move the fleet upriver and moor there. 


Huang Zu led his defeated troops back and told Liu Biao, saying, "Sun Jian was 
too strong for my army." 


Kuai Liang was called in to advise and he said, "Our newly defeated soldiers 
have no heart for fighting now. Therefore we must fortify our position, while we seek 
help from Yuan Shao. Then we can extricate ourselves." 


"A stupid move," said Cai Mao. "The enemy is at the city gates; shall we fold our 
hands and wait to be slain? Give me troops and | will go out and fight to the finish." 


So Cai Mao was placed in command of ten thousand troops and went out to the 
Xian Hills where he drew up his battle line. Sun Jian led the invaders, now flushed 
with success. When Cai Mao approached, Sun Jian looked at him and said, "He is 
brother-in-law to Liu Biao; who will capture him?" 


Cheng Pu set his iron-spined lance and rode out. After a few bouts Cai Mao 
turned and fled. Sun Jian's army rode in and slaughtered till corpses filled the 
countryside, and Cai Mao took refuge in Xiangyang. 


Kuai Liang said, "Cai Mao ought to be put to death by military law. This defeat 
was due to his obstinacy." 


But Liu Biao was unwilling to punish the brother of his newly wedded wife. 


Sun Jian surrounded Xiangyang and assailed the walls daily. One day a fierce 
gale sprang up and the pole bearing his standard was broken. 


"Very inauspicious!" said Han Dang. "We ought to go back." 


Sun Jian said, "| have won every battle and the city is on the point of falling. 
Shall | return because the wind breaks a flagstaff?" 


He flouted the advice and attacked the walls still more vigorously. 


Within the city the defenders had seen an omen. Kuai Liang told Liu Biao, "Last 
night | saw that a great star fall into the sky corresponding to Sun Jian's territory. | 
calculated that it inferred the fall of Sun Jian." 


Then Kuai Liang advised Liu Biao to seek help from Yuan Shao as quickly as 
possible. 


So Liu Biao wrote. Then he asked who would undertake to fight his way through 
the blockade with the letter. One Lu Gong, a warrior of great strength, offered 
himself for this service. 


Kuai Liang said, "If you undertake this service, listen to my advice. You will have 
five hundred soldiers; choose good bowmen. Dash through the enemy's formation 
and make for Xian Hills. You will be pursued; but send a hundred soldiers up the 
hill to prepare large stones, and place a hundred archers in ambush in the woods. 
These are not to flee from the pursuers but to beguile them along devious ways 
round to the place where the boulders have been prepared. There stones will be 
rolled down and arrows shot. If you succeed, fire off a series of bombs as a signal, 
and the armies in the city will come out to help. If you are not pursued, get away as 
fast as possible. Tonight will be suitable as there is very little moon. Start at dusk." 


Lu Gong having received these directions, prepared his force to carry them out. 
As soon as day began to close in, he went quietly out at the east gate. Sun Jian 
was in his tent when he heard shouting and a soldier came to report: "There was a 
group of horsemen going out from the city." 


Sun Jian at once mounted and rode out with thirty horsemen to discover the 
cause. Lu Gong's troops had already hidden themselves in the thick woods. Sun 
Jian rode ahead of his escort, and soon he found himself alone and close to the 
enemy. He called out to them to halt. Lu Gong at once turned back and came as if 
to fight. But they had only exchanged a single pass when Lu Gong again fled, 
taking the road among the hills. Sun Jian followed but soon lost sight of his foe. 


Sun Jian turned up the hill. Then the gongs clanged and down the hills fell 
showers of stones, while from among the trees the arrows flew in clouds. Sun Jian 
was hit by several arrows and a huge stone crushed in his head. Both he and his 
steed were killed. Sun Jian was only thirty-seven years old at his death. 


His escort was overpowered and every man of them slain. Then Lu Gong let off 
a series of bombs, the sign of success, as agreed. At this signal Huang Zu, Kuai 
Yue, and Cai Mao led three armies out of the city and fell upon the Changsha 
troops, throwing them into the utmost confusion. 


When Huang Gai heard the sound of battle, he led up the troops from the ships. 
He met Huang Zu and took Huang Zu prisoner after a brief fight. 


Cheng Pu set out to bear the sad news to Sun Ce. While he was seeking a way 
out, he came across Lu Gong. Cheng Pu at once put his horse at full soeed and 
engaged Lu Gong. After a few bouts Lu Gong went down under a spear thrust. The 
battle became general and continued till daylight broke, when each drew off his 
army. Liu Biao withdrew into the city. 


When Sun Ce returned to the river, he heard that his father had perished in the 
fight, and his body had been carried within the enemy's walls. He uttered a great 
cry, and the army joined him with wailing and tears. 


"How can | return home leaving my father's corpse with them?" cried Sun Ce. 


Huang Gai said, "We have Huang Zu as our prisoner. Let one enter the city and 
discuss peace, giving up our prisoner for our lord's body." 


He had barely finished speaking when an officer in the army, Huan Jie, offered 
himself as messenger, saying, "| am an old friend of Liu Biao. | volunteer to take the 
mission." 


Sun Ce agreed. So Huan Jie went and peace was discussed. Liu Biao told 
Huan Jie, saying, "The body is already laid in a coffin and ready to be delivered as 
soon as Huang Zu returned. Let us both cease fighting and never again invade 
each other's territories." 


Huan Jie thanked him and took his leave. But as Huan Jie went down the steps, 
Kuai Liang suddenly broke in, saying, "No, no! Let me speak and | will see to it that 
not a single enemy can survive. | pray you first put this person to death and then to 
employ my means." 


Pursuing his enemy, Sun Jian dies; 
On a peaceful mission, Huan Jie is threatened. 


The fate of the ambassador will be disclosed in a later chapter. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 8: 
Wang Yun Prepares The Chaining Scheme; 
Dong Zhuo Rages At Phoenix Pavilion. 


This is what Kuai Liang said, "Sun Jian is now gone and his sons are but youths. 
Seize this moment of weakness to break into Changsha, and it is yours in one beat 
of the drum. If you return the corpse and make peace, you give them time to grow 


powerful, and evil will ensue to Jingzhou." 
"How can | leave Huang Zu in their hands?" said Liu Biao. 
"Why not sacrifice this blundering warrior for a region?" 
"But he is my dear friend and to abandon him is wrong." 


So Huan Jie was allowed to return to his own side with the understanding that 
Sun Jian's dead body should be given in exchange. Sun Ce freed his prisoner, 
brought away his father's coffin, and the fighting ceased. Sun Jian was interred in 
the plains of Que. When the ceremonies were over, Sun Ce led his army home 
again. 


In Changsha, the southern territory of the Great River, Sun Ce set himself to the 
task of ruling well. Being humble and generous, he invited to his side humans of 
wisdom and valor and so bore himself that all the best and bravest of the country 
gathered about him. 


Meanwhile, Dong Zhuo at Capital Changan, when he heard of the death of the 
turbulent Sun Jian, said, "An evil that pressed hard upon my heart has been 
removed!" 


He asked what children Sun Jian had left, and when they told him the eldest was 
but seventeen, he dismissed all anxiety from his thoughts. 


From this time forward his arrogance and domineering spirit waxed worse and 
worse. He styled himself "Imperial Rector," a name full of honor, and in all his 
behavior aped imperial state. He created his younger brother, Dong Min, Lord of 
Huazhou and made him Commander of the Left Army. A nephew, Dong Huang, 
was made Court Counselor and placed in command of the Palace Guard, and 
everyone of his clan, young or old, was ennobled. Eighty miles from the capital 
Dong Zhuo laid out a city called Meiwo, an exact replica of Changan, with its 
palaces, granaries, treasuries, and magazines, and employed a quarter of a million 
people to build it. Here he accumulated supplies sufficient for twenty years. He 
selected eight hundred of the most beautiful maidens and sent them to dwell in his 
new city. The stores of wealth in every form were incalculable. All his family and 
retainers found quarters in this new city. 


Dong Zhuo visited his city at intervals of a month or so, and every visit was like 
an imperial progress, with booths by the roadside to refresh the officials and 
courtiers who attended him to the northwest Royal Gate and saw him start. 


On one occasion Dong Zhuo spread a great feast for all those assembled to 
witness his departure; and while it was in progress, there arrived a large number of 
rebels from the north who had voluntarily surrendered. The tyrant had them brought 


before him as he sat at table and meted out to them wanton cruelties. The hands of 
this one were lopped off, the feet of that; one had his eyes gouged out; another lost 
his tongue. Some were boiled to death. Shrieks of agony arose to the very 
heavens, and the courtiers were faint with terror. But the author of the misery ate 
and drank, chatted and smiled as if nothing was going on. 


Another day Dong Zhuo was presiding at a great gathering of officers who were 
seated in two long rows. After the wine had gone up and down several times, Lu Bu 
entered and whispered a few words in his master's ear. 


Dong Zhuo smiled and said, "He was always so. Take Minister Zhang Wen 
outside." 


The others all turned pale. In a little time a serving man brought the head of their 
fellow guest on a red dish and showed it to their host. They nearly died with fright. 


"Do not fear," said Dong Zhuo smiling. "Minister Zhang Wen was in league with 
Yuan Shu to assassinate me. A letter he wrote fell by mistake into the hands of my 
son so | have had him put to death. You gentlemen, who have no reason, need 
have no fear." 


The officials hastened to disperse. One of them, Minister of the Interior Wang 
Yun, who had witnessed all this, returned to his palace very pensive and much 
distressed. The same evening, a bright moonlight night, he took his staff and went 
strolling in his private garden. Standing near one of the creeper trellises, he gazed 
up at the sky and the tears rolled down his cheeks. Suddenly he heard a rustle in 
the Peony Pavilion and someone sighing deeply. Stealthily creeping near, he saw 
there one of the household singing girls named Diao Chan. 


This maiden had been brought up in his palace, where she had been taught to 
sing and dance. At twenty-one, she was then just bursting into womanhood, a 
pretty and clever girl whom Wang Yun regarded more as a daughter than a 
dependant. 


After listening for some time, Wang Yun suddenly called out, "What mischief are 
you up to there, you naughty girl?" 


The maiden dropped on her knees in terror, saying, "Would thy unworthy 
handmaid dare to do anything wrong?" 


"Then what are you sighing about out here in the darkness?" 
"May thy handmaid speak from the bottom of her heart?" 


"Tell me the whole truth; do not conceal anything." 


And the girl said, "Thy handmaid has been the recipient of bountiful kindness. 
She has been taught to sing and dance and been treated so kindly that were she 
torn in pieces for her lord's sake, it would not repay a thousandth part. She has 
noticed lately that her lord's brows have been knit in distress and knows it is on 
account of the state troubles. But she has not dared to ask. This evening he 
seemed more sad than ever, and she was miserable on her lord's account. But she 
did not know she would be seen. Could she be of any use she would not shrink 
from a myriad deaths." 


A sudden idea came to Wang Yun, and he stuck the ground with his staff. And 
he said, "Who would think that the fate of Han lay on your palm? Come with me!" 


The girl followed him into the house. Then he dismissed all the waiting 
attendants, placed Diao Chan on a chair and bowed before her. She was 
frightened and threw herself on the ground, asking in terror what it all meant. 


Said Wang Yun, "You can sympathize with the people of Han," and the fount of 
his tears opened afresh. 


"My lord, as thy handmaid said just now, use her in any way; thy handmaid will 
never shrink," said the girl. 


Wang Yun knelt, saying, "The people are on the brink of destruction, the prince 
and his officers are in jeopardy, and you, you are the only savior. That wretch Dong 
Zhuo wants to depose the Emperor and not a person among us can find means to 
stop him. Now he has a son, a bold warrior it is true, but both father and son have a 
weakness for beauty, and | am going to use what | may call the 'chaining' plan. | 
shall first propose you in marriage to Lu Bu and then, after you are betrothed, | shall 
present you to Dong Zhuo, and you will take every opportunity to force them 
asunder and turn sway their countenances from each other, cause the son to kill 
his adopted father and so put an end to the great evil. Thus you may restore the 


altars of the land that it may live again. All this lies within your power; will you do 
it?" 


"Thy handmaid has promised not to recoil from death itself. You may use my 
poor self in any way, and | must do my best." 


"But if this gets abroad then we are all lost!" 


"Fear not;" said she, "if thy handmaid does not show gratitude, may she perish 
beneath a myriad swords!" 


"Thank you, thank you!" said Wang Yun. 


Then Wang Yun took from the family treasury many pearls and bade a cunning 
jeweler make therewith a fine golden headdress, which was sent as a present to Lu 


Bu. He was delighted and came to thank the donor. When Lu Bu arrived, he was 
met at the gate by Wang Yun himself and within found a table full of dainties for his 
delectation. He was conducted into the private apartments and placed in the seat of 
honor. 


Lu Bu said, "| am but a simple officer in the palace of a minister; you are an 
exalted officer of state; why am | treated thus?" 


"Because in the whole land there is no hero your equal. Poor Wang Yun bows 
not to an officer's rank; poor Wang Yun bows to his ability " 


This gratified Lu Bu mightily, and his host continued to praise and flatter and ply 
him with wine and to talk of the virtues of the Prime Minister and his henchman. 


Lu Bu laughed and drank huge goblets. 
Presently most of the attendants were sent away, only a few kept to press the 
guest to drink. When the guest was very mellow, Wang Yun suddenly said, "Let the 


child come in!" 


Soon appeared two attendants, dressed in white, leading between them the 
exquisite and fascinating Diao Chan. 


"Who is this?" said Lu Bu startled into sobriety. 


"This is my little girl, Diao Chan. You will not be annoyed at my familiarity, will 
you? But you have been so very friendly, | thought you would like to see her." 


Wang Yun bade Diao Chan present a goblet of wine, and her eyes met those of 
the warrior. 


Wang Yun feigning intoxication said, "My little child begs you, General, to take a 
cup or two. We all depend upon you, all our house." 


Lu Bu begged Diao Chan to sit down. She pretended to wish to retire. Her 
master pressed her to remain, saying that she might do so since the guest was a 
dear friend. So she took a seat modestly near her master. 


Lu Bu kept his gaze fixed upon the maid, while he swallowed cup after cup of 
wine. 


"| should like to present her to you as a handmaid; would you accept?" said 
Wang Yun. 


The guest started up. 


"If that is so, you may rely upon my abject gratitude," said Lu Bu. 
"We will choose a propitious day ere long and send her to the palace." 


Lu Bu was overjoyed. He could not keep his eyes off Diao Chan, and loving 
glances flashed from her liquid eyes. 


However the time came for the guest to leave, and Wang Yun said, "| would ask 
you to remain the night, but the Prime Minister might suspect something." 


Lu Bu thanked him again and again and departed. 


Some few days later when Wang Yun was at court and Lu Bu was absent, Wang 
Yun bowed low before Dong Zhuo and said, "I wish that you would deign to come 
to dine at my lowly cottage; could your noble thought bend that way?" 


"Should you invite me, | would certainly hasten," was the reply. 


Wang Yun thanked him. Then Wang Yun went home and prepared in the 
reception hall a feast in which figured every delicacy from land and sea. Beautiful 
embroideries surrounded the chief seat in the center, and elegant curtains were 
hung within and without. At noon next day, when the Prime Minister arrived, Wang 
Yun met him at the gate in full court costume. Wang Yun stood by while Dong Zhuo 
stepped out of his chariot, and Dong Zhuo and a host of one hundred armed 
guards crowded into the hall. Dong Zhuo took his seat at the top, his suite fell into 
two lines right and left; while Wang Yun stood humbly at the lower end. Dong Zhuo 
bade his people conduct Wang Yun to a place beside himself. 


Said Wang Yun, "The great Prime Minister's abundant virtue is as the high 
mountains; neither the ancient sages-~-Yi Yin and Duke Zhou-~-could attain 
thereto." 


Dong Zhuo smiled. They bore in the dishes and the wine, and the music began. 
Wang Yun plied his guest with assiduous flattery and studied deference. When it 
grew late and the wine had done its work, Dong Zhuo was invited to the inner 
chamber. So he sent away his guards and went. 


Here the host raised a goblet and drank to his guest, saying, "From my youth up | 
have understood something of astrology and have been studying the aspect of the 
heavens. | read that the days of Han are numbered, and that the great Prime 
Minister's merits command the regard of all the world, as when King Shun 
succeeded King Yao, and King Yu continued the work of King Shun, all by the 
strength of their own merits, conforming to the mind of Heaven and the desire of 
people." 


"How dare | expect this?" said Dong Zhuo. 


"From the days of old, those who walk in the way have replaced those who 
deviate therefrom; those who lack virtue have fallen before those who possess it. 
Can one escape fate?" 


"If indeed the decree of Heaven devolves on me; you shall be held the first in 
merit!" said Dong Zhuo. 


Wang Yun bowed. Then lights were brought in and all the attendants were 
dismissed, save the serving maids to hand the wine. So the evening went on. 


Presently Wang Yun said, "The music of these everyday musicians is too 
commonplace for your ear, but there happens to be in the house a little maid that 
might please you." 


"Excellent!" said the guest. 


Then a curtain was lowered. The shrill tones of reed instruments rang through 
the room, and presently some attendants led forward Diao Chan, who then danced 
on the outside of the curtain. 


A poem praises her: 


For a palace this maiden was born, 
So timid, so graceful, so slender, 
Like a tiny bird flitting at morn 

Over the dew-laden lily buds tender. 
Were this exquisite maid only mine, 
For never a mansion I'd pine. 


Another poem runs thus: 


The music falls; the dancer comes, a swallow gliding in, 

A dainty little damsel, soft as silk; 

Her beauty captivates the guest yet saddens him within, 

For he must soon depart and leave her there. 

She smiles; no gold could buy that smile, no other smiled so, 
No need to deck her form with jewels rare. 

But when the dance is over and coy glances come and go, 
Then who shall be the chosen of the fair? 


The dance ended. Dong Zhuo bade them lead the maiden in, and she came, 


bowing low as she approached him. He was much taken with her beauty and 
modest grace. 


"Who is she?" said Dong Zhuo. 

"A singing girl; her name is Diao Chan." 

"Then can she sing?" 

The master bade her sing, and she did so to the accompaniment of castanets. 


There is a measure describing her youthful beauty: 


You stand, a dainty maiden, 
Your cherry lips so bright, 

Your teeth so pearly white, 
Your fragrant breath love-laden; 
Yet is your tongue a sword; 
Cold death is the reward 

Of loving thee, O maiden. 


Dong Zhuo was delighted and praised her warmly. She was told to present a 
goblet of wine to the guest which he took from her hands and then asked her age. 

She replied, "Thy unworthy handmaid is twenty-one." 

"A perfect little fairy!" said Dong Zhuo. 


Then Wang Yun rose and said, "If the Prime Minister would not mind, | should 
like to offer him this little maid." 


"How could | be grateful enough for such a kindness!" 
"She would be most fortunate if she could be your servant," said Wang Yun. 
Dong Zhuo thanked his host warmly. 


Then the orders were given to prepare a closed carriage and convey Diao Chan 
to the Prime Minister's palace. 


Soon after Dong Zhuo took his leave, and Wang Yun accompanied him the 
whole way. 


After he had taken leave, Wang Yun mounted to ride homeward. Half way he 
met two lines of guards with red lamps who were escorting Lu Bu who was on 


horseback and armed with his trident halberd. 


Seeing Wang Yun, Lu Bu at once reined in, stopped, seized him by the sleeve, 
and said angrily, "You promised Diao Chan to me and now you have given her to 
the Prime Minister: what foolery is this?" 


Wang Yun checked him, saying, "This is no place to talk; | pray you come to my 
house." 


So they went together, and Wang Yun led Lu Bu into a private room. 


After the usual exchange of polite greetings, Wang Yun said, "Why do you find 
fault with me, General?" 


"Somebody told me that you had sent Diao Chan to the Prime Minister's palace 
in a covered carriage: what does it mean?" 


"Of course you do not understand. Yesterday when | was at court, the Prime 
Minister told me he had something to talk to me about in my own house. So 
naturally | prepared for his coming, and while we were at dinner he said, 'l have 
heard something of a girl named Diao Chan whom you have promised to my son 
Lu Bu. | thought it was mere rumor so | wanted to ask if it was true. Beside | should 
like to see her.' | could not say no, so she came in and made her bow to the lord of 
lords. Then he said that it was a lucky day and he would take her away with him 
and betroth her to you. Just think, Sir: when the Prime Minister had come himself, 
could | stop him?" 


"You were not so very wrong;" said Lu Bu, "but for a time | had misunderstood 
you. | owe you an apology." 


"The girl has a small trousseau, which | will send as soon as she has gone over 
to your dwelling." 


Lu Bu thanked him and went away. Next day he went into the Palace to find out 
the truth, but could hear nothing. Then he made his way into the private quarters 
and questioned the maids. Presently one told him that the Prime Minister had 
brought home a new bedfellow the night before and was not up yet. Lu Bu was very 
angry. Next he crept round behind his master's sleeping apartment. 


By this time Diao Chan had risen and was dressing her hair at the window. 
Looking out she saw a long shadow fall across the little lake. She recognized the 
headdress, and peeping around she saw it was indeed no other than Lu Bu. 
Thereupon she contracted her eyebrows, simulating the deepest grief, and with her 
dainty handkerchief she wiped her eyes again and again. Lu Bu stood watching 
her a long time. 


Soon after he went in to give morning greeting. Dong Zhuo was sitting in the 
reception room. Seeing his henchman, Dong Zhuo asked if there was anything 
new. 


"Nothing," was the reply. 


Lu Bu waited while Dong Zhuo took his morning meal. As he stood beside his 
master, he glanced over at the curtain and saw a woman there behind the screen 
showing a half face from time to time and throwing amorous glances at him. He felt 
it was his beloved and his thoughts flew to her. Presently Dong Zhuo noticed his 
expression and began to feel suspicious. 


"If there is nothing, you may go," said Dong Zhuo. 
Lu Bu sulkily withdrew. 


Dong Zhuo now thought of nothing but his new mistress and for more than a 
month neglected all affairs, devoting himself entirely to pleasure. Once he was a 
little indisposed, and Diao Chan was constantly at his side, never even undressing 
to show her solicitude. She gratified his every whim. Dong Zhuo grew more and 
more fond of her. 


One day Lu Bu went to inquire after his father's health. Dong Zhuo was asleep, 
and Diao Chan was sitting at the head of his couch. Leaning forward she gazed at 
the visitor, with one hand pointed to her heart, the other at Dong Zhuo asleep, and 
her tears fell. Lu Bu felt heartbroken. Dong Zhuo drowsily opened his eyes; and 
seeing his son's gaze fixed on something behind him, he turned over and saw who 
it was. He angrily rebuked his son, saying, "Dare you make love to my beauty?" 


He told the servants to turn Lu Bu out, shouting, "Never let him enter here again!" 

Lu Bu went off home very wrath. Meeting Li Ru, he told Li Ru the cause of his 
anger. The adviser hastened to see his master and said, "Sir, you aspire to be ruler 
of the empire, why then for a small fault do you blame the General? If he turns 
against you, it is all over." 


"Then what can | do?" said Dong Zhuo. 


"Recall him tomorrow; treat him well; overwhelm him with gifts and fair words; 
and all will be well." 


So Dong Zhuo did so. He sent for Lu Bu and was very gracious and said, "| was 
irritable and hasty yesterday owing to my illness and | wronged you, | know. Forget 
it." 


He gave Lu Bu three hundred ounces of gold and twenty rolls of brocade. And 


so the quarrel was made up. But though Lu Bu's body was with his adopted father 
Dong Zhuo, his heart was with his promised bride Diao Chan. 


Dong Zhuo having quite recovered went to court again, and Lu Bu followed him 
as usual. Seeing Dong Zhuo deep in conversation with the Emperor, Lu Bu, armed 
as he was, went out of the Palace and rode off to his chief's residence. He tied up 
his steed at the entrance and, halberd in hand, went to the private apartment to 
seek his love. He found Diao Chan, and she told him to go out into the garden 
where she would join him soon. He went, taking his halberd with him, and he 
leaned against the rail of the Phoenix Pavilion to wait for Diao Chan. 


After a long time she appeared, swaying gracefully as she made her way under 
the drooping willows and parting the flowers as she passed. She was exquisite, a 
perfect little fairy from the Palace of the Moon. 


Tears were in her eyes as she came up and said, "Though | am not the Minister's 
real daughter, yet he treated me as his own child. The desire of my life was fulfilled 
when he plighted me to you. But oh! to think of the wickedness of the Prime 
Minister, stealing my poor self as he did. | suffered so much. | longed to die, only 
that | had not told you the real truth. So | lived on, bearing my shame as best as | 
could but feeling it mean still to live. Now that | have seen you, | can end it all. My 
poor sullied body is no longer fit to serve a hero. | can die before your eyes and so 
prove how true | am!" 


Thus speaking she seized the curving rail and started into the lily pond. Lu Bu 
caught her in his strong arms and wept as he held her close. 


"| Knew it; | always knew your heart," he sobbed. "Only we never had a chance to 
speak." 


She threw her arms about Lu Bu. 

"If | cannot be your wife in this life, | will in the ages to come," she whispered. 
"If | do not marry you in this life, | am no hero," said he. 

"Every day is a year long. O pity me! Rescue me! My lord!" 


"| have only stolen away for a brief moment, and | am afraid that old rebel will 
suspect something, so | must not stay too long," said Lu Bu. 


Diao Chan clung to his robe, saying, "If you fear the old thief so much, | shall 
never see another sunrise." 


Lu Bu stopped. 


"Give me a little time to think," said he. 
And he picked up his halberd to go. 


"In the deep seclusion of the harem, | heard the stories of your prowess; you 
were the one man who excelled all others. Little did | think that you of all heroes 
would rest content under the dominion of another." 


And tears rained again! 


A wave of shame flooded his face. Leaning his halberd against the railing, he 
turned and clasped the girl to his breast, soothing her with fond words. The lovers 
held each other close, swaying to and fro with emotion. How could they bring 
themselves to say farewell? 


In the meantime Dong Zhuo missed his henchman, and doubt filled his heart. 
Hastily taking leave of the Emperor, he mounted his chariot and returned to his 
palace. There at the gate stood Lu Bu's well known steed Red-Hare, riderless. 
Dong Zhuo questioned the doorkeepers, and they told him the General was within. 
He sent away his attendants and went alone to the private apartments. Lu Bu was 
not there. He called Diao Chan, but there was no reply. He asked where she was, 
and the waiting maids told him she was in the garden among the flowers. 


So Dong Zhuo went into the garden, and there he saw the lovers in the pavilion 
in most tender talk. Lu Bu's trident halberd was leaning on the railing beside him. 


A howl of rage escaped Dong Zhuo and startled the lovers. Lu Bu turned, saw 
who it was, and ran away. Dong Zhuo caught up the halberd and ran in pursuit. But 
Lu Bu was fleet of foot while his master was very stout. Seeing no hope of catching 
the runaway, Dong Zhuo hurled the halberd. Lu Bu fended it off and it fell to the 
ground. Dong Zhuo picked it up and ran on. But by this time Lu Bu was far ahead. 
Just as Dong Zhuo was running out at the garden gate, he dashed full tilt against 
another man running in, and down he went. 


Surged up his wrath within him as the billows heavenward leap. 
Crashed his unwieldy body to earth in a shapeless heap. 


We shall presently see who the other runner was. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 9: 
Lu Bu Kills Dong Zhuo For Wang Yun; 
Li Jue Attacks The Capital On Jia Xu's Advice. 


The person who collided with the irate Dong Zhuo was his most trusty adviser Li 
Ru. Li Ru had not fallen in spite of the shock and at once scrambled to help Dong 
Zhuo to regain his feet and led him inside to the library, where they sat down. 


"What were you coming about?" said Dong Zhuo. 


"Happening to be passing your gates, | heard that you had gone into your 
private garden to look for your adopted son. Then came Lu Bu running and crying 
out that you wanted to kill him, and | was coming in as fast as | could to intercede 
for him when | accidentally collided with you. | am very sorry. | deserve death." 


"The wretch! How could | bear to see him toying with my fair one? | will be the 
death of his yet." 


"Your Graciousness is making a mistake. It is the 'plucked tassel’ story over 
again. But if you remember the banquet of old time where all guests were to tear 
the tassels of their hats. In that banquet, King Zhuang of Chu made no fuss about 
the liberties taken with his queen, although the hat-tassel in her hand betrayed the 
culprit Jiang Xiong. His restraint stood him good stead, for the same Jiang Xiong 
saved his life when he was hemmed in by the soldiers of Qin. After all Diao Chan is 
only a handmaid, but Lu Bu is your trustiest friend and most dreaded commander. If 
you took this chance of making the girl over to him, your kindness would win his 
undying gratitude. | beg you, Sir, to think over it well." 


Dong Zhuo hesitated a long time; he sat murmuring to himself. Presently he 
said, "What you Say is right. | must think over it." 


Li Ru felt satisfied. He took leave of his master and went away. Dong Zhuo went 
to his private rooms and called Diao Chan. 


"What were you doing there with Lu Bu?" said he. 


She began to weep, saying, "Thy handmaid was in the garden among the 


flowers, when he rushed in on me. | was frightened and ran away. He asked why | 
ran away from a son of the family and pursued me right to the pavilion, where you 
saw us. He had that halberd in his hand all the time. | felt he was a vicious man and 
would force me to his will, so | tried to throw myself into the lily pond, but he caught 
me in his arms and held me so that | was helpless. Luckily just at that moment you 
came and saved my life." 


"Suppose | send you to him," said Dong Zhuo. 

Stunned, she said in tears, "What have thy handmaid done? The honor of 
serving only Your Highness could not stand being given to a mere underling! 
Never! | would rather die." 

And with this she snatched down a dagger hanging on the wall to kill herself. 
Dong Zhuo plucked it from her hand and, throwing his arms about her, and cried, "I 
was only joking." 

She lay back on his breast hiding her face and sobbing bitterly. 

"This is the doing of that Li Ru," said she. "He is much too thick with Lu Bu. He 
suggested that, | know. Little he cares for the Imperial Rector's reputation or my life. 
Oh! | could eat him alive." 


"Do you think | could bear to lose you?" said Dong Zhuo. 


"Though you love me yet | must not stay here. That Lu Bu will try to ruin me if | 
do. | fear him." 


"We will go to Meiwo tomorrow, you and I, and we will be happy together and 
have no cares." 


She dried her tears and thanked him. Next day Li Ru came again to persuade 
Dong Zhuo to send the damsel to Lu Bu. 


"This is a propitious day," said Li Ru. 

"He and | standing in the relation of father and son. | cannot very well do that," 
said Dong Zhuo. "But | will say no more about his fault. You may tell him so and 
soothe him as well as you can." 


"You are not being beguiled by the woman, are you?" said Li Ru. 


Dong Zhuo colored, saying, "Would you like to give your wife to some body 
else? Do not talk about this any further. It would be better not to." 


Li Ru left the chamber. When he got outside, he cast his eyes up to heaven, 


saying, "We are dead people, slain by the hand of this girl!" 


When a scholar of history reached this episode he wrote a verse or two: 


Just introduce a woman, 
Conspiracies succeed; 

Of soldiers, or their weapons, 
There really is no need. 

They fought their bloody battles, 
And doughty deeds were done; 
But in a garden summer house 
The victory was won. 


The order was given to journey to Meiwo, and the whole body of officers 
assembled to add luster to the start. Diao Chan, from her carriage, saw Lu Bu 
among the crowd. She at once dropped her eyes and assumed an appearance of 
deepest melancholy. After the cavalcade started and when her carriage had almost 
disappeared in the distance, the disappointed lover reined in his steed on a mount 
whence he could watch the dust that rose around it. Unutterable sadness filled his 
heart. 


Suddenly a voice said, "Why do you not accompany the Prime Minister, General, 
instead of standing here and sighing?" 


It was Wang Yun. 

"| have been confined to the house by illness these few days," continued he, "so 
| have not seen you. But | had to struggle out today to see the Prime Minister set off. 
This meeting is most fortunate. But why were you sighing?" 


"Just on account of that daughter of yours," said Lu Bu. 


Feigning great astonishment Wang Yun said, "So long a time and yet not given 
to you!" 


"The old ruffian has fallen in love with her himself." 

"Surely this cannot be true." 

Lu Bu related the whole story while Wang Yun listened, silent, but stamping on 
the ground as with irritation and perplexity. After a long time Wang Yun said, "I did 


not think he was such a beast." 


Taking Lu Bu by the hand, Wang Yun said, "Come to my house, and we will talk 


it over." 


So they went away together to the house and retired to a secret room. After 
some refreshments, Lu Bu told the whole story of the episode in Phoenix Pavilion 
just as it happened. 


Wang Yun said, "He seems to have corrupted my little girl and has stolen your 
wife. He will be an object of shame and ridicule to the whole world. And those who 
do not laugh at him will laugh at you and me. Alas! | am old and powerless and can 
do nothing. More pitied than blamed! But you, General, you are a warrior, the 
greatest hero in the world. Yet you have been put to this shame and exposed to this 
contempt." 


A wave of fierce wrath rolled up in Lu Bu. Banging the table he shouted and 
roared. His host ostentatiously tried to calm him, saying, "I forgot myself. | should 
not have spoken like that. Do not be so angry, | pray." 


"| will kill the wretch, | swear it. In no other way can | wash away my shame." 


"No, no! Do not say such a thing," said Wang Yun, putting his hand over the 
other's mouth. "You will bring trouble on poor me and my family." 


"When one is born great, one cannot be patient for long under another person's 
domination," said Lu Bu. 


"It needs some one greater than the Prime Minister to limit the scope of such 
talents as yours." 


Lu Bu said, "I would not mind killing the old wretch were it not for the relation in 
which we stand. | fear to provoke the hostile criticism of posterity." 


Wang Yun smiled, saying, "Your name is Lu Bu; his is Dong Zhuo. Where was 
the paternal feeling when he threw the halberd at you?" 


"| had been misled if you had not said that," said Lu Bu hotly. 

Wang Yun saw the effect of his words and continued, "It would be a loyal deed to 
restore the House of Han, and history would hand down your name to posterity 
perpetually fragrant. If you lend your aid to Dong Zhuo, you will be a traitor and 
your name will be tainted through all ages." 

Lu Bu rose from his place and bowed to Wang Yun. 


"| have decided," said he. "You need not fear, Sir." 


"But yet you may fail and bring upon yourself misfortune," said Wang Yun. 


Lu Bu drew his dagger, pricking his arm, and swearing by the blood that flowed. 
Wang Yun fell on his knees and thanked him. 


"Then the Han sacrifices will not be cut off, and you will be their savior. But this 
must remain a secret, and | will tell you how the plot shall be worked out." 


Lu Bu took leave with great emotion. 


Wang Yun took into his confidence two colleagues, Minister Shisun Rui and 
Imperial Commander Huang Wan. 


Shisun Rui said, "The moment is favorable. The Emperor has just recovered 
from his illness, and we can dispatch an able talker to Meiwo to persuade Dong 
Zhuo to come here to discuss affairs. Meanwhile we will obtain a secret decree as 
authority for Lu Bu to lay an ambush just inside the palace gates to kill Dong Zhuo 
as he enters. This is the best plan to adopt." 


"But who would dare to go?" said Huang Wan. 


"Li Su, General of the Imperial Tiger Army, would go. He belongs to the same 
region as Lu Bu and is very angry with the Prime Minister for not advancing him. 
His going would assure us the plan would be completed." 


"Good," said Wang Yun. "Let us see what Lu Bu thinks of it." 


When Lu Bu was consulted, he told them that this Li Su's persuasion had led 
him to kill Ding Yuan, his former benefactor. 


"If Li Su refuses this mission, | will kill him," said Lu Bu. 


So they sent for Li Su. When Li Su arrived, Lu Bu said, "Formerly you talked me 
into killing Ding Yuan and going over to Dong Zhuo. Now we find Dong Zhuo 
means evil for the Emperor and is an oppressor of the people. His iniquities are 
many, and he is hated by gods and humans. You go to Meiwo, say you have a 
command from the Emperor to summon the Prime Minister to the Palace. He will 
come, and he will be put to death. You will have the credit of being loyal and 
restoring the Hans. Will you undertake this?" 


"| also wish to slay him," was the reply. "But | could not find anyone to assist me. 
How can | hesitate? Your intervention is directly from Heaven." 


And Li Su snapped an arrow in twain as register of his oath. 


"If this Succeeds, what glorious rank will be yours!" said Wang Yun. 


Next day Li Su, with a small escort, set out for Meiwo and announced himself as 
bearer of a decree. He was conducted into Dong Zhuo's presence. After he had 
made his obeisance, Dong Zhuo asked what the decree was. 

"His Majesty has recovered and wishes his ministers to meet him in the Palace 
to consider the question of his abdication in your favor. That is what this summons 
means." 

"What does Wang Yun think of the scheme?" 


"Wang Yun has already begun the construction of the Terrace of Abdication and 
only awaits my lord's arrival." 


"Last night | dreamed a dragon coiled round my body," said Dong Zhuo greatly 
pleased, "and now | get this happy tidings! | must not neglect the opportunity." 


So Dong Zhuo gave instructions to his four trusted generals for the safekeeping 
of his city. Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, and Zhang Ji were to guard Meiwo with three 
thousand troops of the Flying Bear Army. Then Dong Zhuo announced his intention 
of starting on the morrow. 

"When | am Emperor, you shall be Commander of the Capital District," said he. 

"Your minister thanks you," said Li Su. 

Dong Zhuo went to bid farewell to his ninety-year-old mother. 

"Whither are you going, my son?" asked she. 

"| go to receive the abdication of Han; and soon you will be the Empress." 


"| have been feeling nervous and creepy these few days. It is a bad sign." 


"Any one about to become the Mother of the State must have premonitions," said 
her son. 


He left her with these words. 


Just before starting, he said to Diao Chan, "When | am Emperor, you shall be 
Lady of the Palace." 


She bowed low thanking him, but she knew and inwardly rejoiced. 


Dong Zhuo went out, mounted his carriage, and began his journey to Capital 
Changan with an imposing escort. Less than ten miles the wheel of his carriage 


broke. He left it and mounted a horse. Another ten miles the horse snorted and 
neighed, threw up his head and snapped the reins. 


Dong Zhuo turned to Li Su and asked what these things portended. 


"It means that you are going to receive the abdication of the Hans, which is to 
renew all things, to mount the jeweled chariot and sit in the golden saddle." 


And Dong Zhuo was pleased and convinced with this answer. During the 
second day's journey a violent gale sprang up, and the sky became covered with a 
thick mist. 


"What does this mean?" said Dong Zhuo. 


The wily Li Su had an interpretation for this also, saying, "You are ascending to 
the place of the dragon; there must be bright light and lurid vapor to dignify your 
majestic approach." 


Dong Zhuo had no more doubts. He presently arrived and found many officials 
waiting without the city gate to receive him, all but Li Ru who was ill and unable to 
leave his chamber. He entered and proceeded to his own palace, where Lu Bu 
came to congratulate him. 


"When | sit on the throne, you shall command the whole armies of the empire, 
horse and foot," said Dong Zhuo. 


That night Dong Zhuo slept in the midst of his escort. In the suburbs that evening 
some children at play were singing a little ditty, and the words drifted into the 
bedchamber on the wind. 


"The grass in the meadow looks fresh now and green, 
Yet wait but ten days, not a blade will be seen." 


The song sounded ominous but Li Su was again prepared with a happy 
interpretation: "It only means that the Lius are about to disappear, and the Dongs to 
be exalted." 


Next morning at the first streak of dawn, Dong Zhuo prepared for his appearance 
at court. On the way he saw a Taoist, dressed in a black robe and wearing a white 
turban, who carried in his hand a tall staff with a long strip of white cloth attached. 
At each end of the cloth was drawn a mouth. (Forming Chinese characters, implied 
the name of Lu Bu.). 


"What is the meaning of this?" said Dong Zhuo. 


"He is a madman," said Li Su, and he told the guards to drive the fellow away. 


Dong Zhuo went in and found all the officials in court dress lining the road. Li Su 
walked beside his carriage, a sword in his hand. When Li Su reached the north 
gate of the Palace, he found the soldiers of Dong Zhuo drawn up outside and only 
the pushers of the palace carriage, a twenty or so, were allowed to proceed further. 


When Dong Zhuo arrived near the Reception Hall, he saw that Wang Yun and 
all the other officials standing at the door were armed. 


"Why are they all armed?" said Dong Zhuo to Li Su. 
Li Su was silent as he helped push the carriage forward swiftly to the entrance. 
Suddenly Wang Yun shouted, "The rebel is here! Where are the executioners?" 


At this call sprang from both sides soldiers armed with halberds and spears who 
attacked Dong Zhuo. He had not put on the breastplate he usually wore, and a 
spear pierced his breast. He sank down in the carriage calling loudly for his son, 
"Where is Lu Bu?" 


"Here, and with a decree to deal with a rebel," said Lu Bu, as he appeared in 
front of his "father." 


Thereupon he thrust his trident halberd through the victim's throat. Then Li Su 
hacked off the head and held it up. Lu Bu, his left hand holding his halberd, thrust 
his right hand into his bosom whence he drew the decree, crying, "The decree was 
to slay the rebel Dong Zhuo; no other." 


The whole assembly shouted, "Live forever! O Emperor." 


A sympathetic poet has written a few lines in pity: 


Await the time, O noble, and be king, 

Or failing, reap the solace riches bring; 
Heaven never is partial, but severely just, 
Meiwo stood strong, yet now it lies in dust. 


The lust of blood awakened, Lu Bu urged the slaughter of Li Ru, who had been 
the confidant of the murdered Prime Minister, and Li Su volunteered to go in search 
of him. But just then a shouting was heard at the gates, and it was told them that a 
household servant had brought Li Ru in bonds. Wang Yun ordered his immediate 
execution in the market place. 


Dong Zhuo's head was exposed in a crowded thoroughfare. He was very fat, 
and the guards made torches by sticking splints into the body, spilling the corpse's 
grease over the ground. The passers-by pelted the head and spurned the body 
with their feet. 


Wang Yun ordered a force of fifty thousand under Lu Bu, Huangfu Song, and Li 
Su to destroy Meiwo. Learning the news of their master, Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, 
and Zhang Ji fled west swiftly through the night with their Flying Bear Army to 
Liangzhou. 


When arriving Meiwo, Lu Bu's first deed was to take Diao Chan into his charge. 
Then they slew every member of the Dong family, sparing none, not even Dong 
Zhuo's aged mother. The heads of Dong Zhuo's brother Dong Min and his nephew 
Dong Huang were publicly displayed in the market place. In Meiwo were hidden 
many young ladies of good family. These were set free. All properties were 
confiscated. The wealth was enormous-~-several hundred thousand ounces of 
gold, millions of silver coins, pearls, gems, silks, velvets, furs, grain stores. 


When they returned to report success, Wang Yun rewarded and feasted the 
soldiers. Banquets were held in the Ministry Hall to which all the officials were 
invited. They drank and congratulated each other. While the feasting was in 
progress it was announced that some one had come and was wailing over Dong 
Zhuo's corpse exposed in the market place. 


"Dong Zhuo has been put to death," said Wang Yun, angrily. "Every body is glad 
to be rid of him, and yet one is found to lament over him. Who is this?" 


So Wang Yun gave orders to arrest the mourner and bring him in. Soon he was 
brought in, and when they saw him all were startled. For he was no other than 
Imperial Historian Cai Yong. 


Wang Yun spoke to Cai Yong angrily, "Dong Zhuo has been put to death as a 
rebel, and all the land rejoices. You, a Han minister, instead of rejoicing, weep for 
him. Why?" 


Cai Yong confessed his fault, saying, "| am without talent, yet know what is right. 
| am the man to turn my back on my country and toward Dong Zhuo. Yet once | 
experienced his kindness, and | could not help mourning for him. | Know my fault is 
grave, but | pray you regard the reasons. If you will leave my head and only cut off 
my feet, you may use me to continue the History of Han, whereby | may have the 
good fortune to be allowed to expiate my fault." 


All were sorry for Cai Yong, for he was a man of great talents, and they begged 
that he might be spared. The Imperial Guardian, Ma Midi, secretly interceded for 
him, saying, "Cai Yong is famous as a scholar, and he can write glorious history, 


and it is inadvisable to put to death a man renowned for rectitude without 
consideration." 


But in vain, for the High Minister was now strong and obdurate. 


Wang Yun said, "Centuries ago, Emperor Wu spared Sima Qian and employed 
him on the annals, with the result that many slanderous stories have been handed 
down to us. This is a trying period of great perplexity, and we dare not let a 
specious fellow like this wield his pen in criticism of those about the court of a 
youthful prince and abuse us as he will." 


Remonstrance and appeal being vain, Ma Midi retired. But he said to his 
colleagues, "Is Wang Yun then careless of the future? Worthy people are the 
mainstay of the state; laws are the canons of action. To destroy the mainstay and 
nullify the laws is to hasten destruction." 


As was just said Wang Yun was obdurate. Cai Yong whose offense was an 
expression of gratitude was thrown into prison and there strangled. The people of 
that day wept for Cai Yong, for they refused to see any offense in what he had 
done, and death was a harsh punishment. 


Dong Zhuo, the dictator, 
Tyrannized the state, 

Fell and his sole mourner 
Shared his direful fate. 

Zhuge Liang in seclusion 
Was content to dream, 

Felt his worth and never 
Helped a traitor's scheme. 


Those generals-~-Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, and Zhang Ji-~-whom Dong Zhuo 
had left to guard Meiwo fled when their master was slain and went into the county 
of Shanxi in Liangzhou Region. Thence they sent in a memorial entreating 
amnesty. But Wang Yun would not hear of it. 


"Four of them were the chief instruments of Dong Zhuo's aggressions. Now 
though a general amnesty were proclaimed, these men should be excluded from 
its benefit," said Wang Yun. 


The messenger returned and told the four there was no hope of pardon and they 
could only flee. 


Then their adviser, Jia Xu, said, "If we throw away our arms and flee singly, then 
we Shall fall easy victims to any village beadle who may seize us. Rather let us 


cajole the Shanxi people to throw in their lot with us and make a sudden onslaught 
on the capital and so avenge Dong Zhuo. If we succeed, we control the court and 
the empire. There will be enough time to run away if we fail." 


The plan was adopted, and they spread abroad the story that Wang Yun 
intended to massacre the county. 


Having thus thrown the people into a state of terror, they went a step farther and 
said, "There is no advantage in dying for nothing. Revolt and join us!" 


So they cajoled the people into joining them and gathered a host equal to one 
hundred thousand. This horde was divided into four parts, and they all set out to 
raid Capital Changan. On the way they fell in with a son-in-law of their late chief, 
Imperial Commander Niu Fu, who marched five thousand troop from Xiliang. Niu 
Fu had set out to avenge his father-in-law, and he became the van leader of the 
horde. 


As they advanced, the news came to Wang Yun, and he consulted Lu Bu. 


"They are a lot of rats," said Lu Bu. "Never mind how many there are of them. Be 
not in the least anxious." 


So Lu Bu and Li Su went to oppose them. The latter was in advance and met Niu 
Fu. They fought; Niu Fu was outmatched and retired after suffering a slaughter. But 
unexpectedly Niu Fu returned in a night attack, found Li Su quite unprepared and 
drove Li Su's force some ten miles, slaying many. 


Li Su reported the defeat, and Lu Bu raged at him, saying, "You have sullied my 
reputation as a warrior and destroyed our fighting spirit." 


And Lu Bu put Li Su to death, exposing his head at the camp gate. 


Next day Lu Bu advanced his own force and engaged Niu Fu. He overwhelmed 
Niu Fu and drove him off. That night Niu Fu called in his most trusted man, Hu 
Chier, to advise him. 


Hu Chier said, "Lu Bu is too doughty a fighter for us to hope to overcome him. 
Our case is hopeless. Our best course is to desert these four generals, secrete their 
valuables, and leave the army with just a few of our followers." 


The plan of Hu Chier was adopted, and the two traitors and some others that 
very night packed up and made their way out of camp. They were only half a 
dozen. They came to a river and, while crossing, Hu Chier, tempted by the lust of 
wealth, slew his companion. Then he went to offer the head of Niu Fu to Lu Bu. Lu 
Bu inquired into the matter, and when a follower told him the truth, he put the 
double traitor Hu Chier to death. 


Then Lu Bu advanced against the rebels and fell in with Li Jue's force. Without 
giving them time to form in battle, Lu Bu attacked. Horses curvetting and spears set, 
the army dashed in irresistibly, and Li Jue, making no stand, fell back a long way. Li 
Jue took up a position under a hill fifteen miles away and thence sent to call his 
fellows to council. 


Li Jue said, "Lu Bu though brave in battle is no strategist and so not really 
formidable. | will lead my troops to hold the mouth of the gorge, and every day | will 
incite him to attack; and when he comes toward me, General Guo Si can smite his 
rear, after the manner of Peng Yue when he fought against Chu. While thus | am 
alternating attack and retreat, Generals Fan Chou and Zhang Ji will march off in 
different directions toward Changan. Such an attack at two points must end both 
Wang Yun and Lu Bu." 


They set themselves to carry out this scheme. As soon as Lu Bu reached the 
hills, a force of Li Jue came out to attack him. Lu Bu made an angry dash toward 
the enemy who retired up the hills, whence they shot arrows and hurled stones like 
rain. Lu Bu's troops halted. At this moment the report came that the rear was being 
attacked and there appeared Guo Si. At once Lu Bu wheeled toward the new 
enemy, but immediately the rolling drums gave the signal to retire, and Lu Bu could 
not come to blows with them. As he called in his army, the gongs clanged on the 
other side and his former opponent Li Jue came to attack his front. But before Lu Bu 
could join battle, his rear was again assaulted by Guo Si, who in his turn drew off 
immediately. 


Thus Lu Bu was baited till his bosom was near bursting with rage. The same 
tactics continued for several days. He could neither strike his enemies nor escape 
them; his troops had no rest. 


In the midst of these distracting maneuver, a messenger rode up in hot haste to 
report: "The capital is in imminent danger from a double attack of Fan Chou and 
Zhang Ji." 


Lu Bu at once ordered a march to save the capital, which became a rout when 
both his opponents Li Jue and Guo Si came in pursuit. His loss was heavy. 


He soon reached Changan and found the rebels there in enormous numbers 
and the city quite surrounded. Lu Bu's attack had but little effect, and as his temper 
became more savage under defeat, many of his soldiers went over to the rebels. 


He fell into deep melancholy. Then a remnant of Dong Zhuo's adherents still in 
the city, led by Li Meng and Wang Fang, began to lend aid to the attackers; and by 
and by they secretly opened the city gate and the besiegers poured in. Lu Bu 
exerted himself to the utmost but could not stem the tide. At the head of some 
hundred horse, he dashed over to the Black Lock Gate and called out to Wang 


Yun, who was on the other side. 
"The case is desperate now. Ride with me to a place of safety." 


Wang Yun replied, "If | am gifted with the holy spirit of the state, | shall succeed in 
restoring the tranquillity which | desire; but if | have it not, then | offer my body a 
sacrifice. | will not quail before dangers. Thank the noble supporters beyond the 
Pass for their efforts, and bid them remember their country." 


Lu Bu urged Wang Yun again and again, but Wang Yun would not leave. Soon 
flames started up ail over the city, and Lu Bu had to leave, abandoning his family to 
their fate. He fled to seek refuge with Yuan Shu. 


Li Jue, Guo Si, and his fellow leaders gave full license to their ruffians, who 
robbed and murdered their fill. Many high officers perished. Ministers Chong Fu, Lu 
Kui, and Zhou Huan, Imperial Commanders Cui Lie and Wang Qi all died in the 
fighting. In time the rebels penetrated to the inner palace, and the courtiers begged 
the Emperor to proceed to the Gate of Pervading Peace to try to quell the rioting. At 
sight of the yellow umbrella, Li Jue and Fan Chou checked their armies, and they 
all shouted, "Long life O Emperor!" 


The Emperor stood by the tower and addressed them, "Nobles, what means it 
that you enter the capital in this unruly manner and without my summons?" 


The two leaders looked up and said, "Dong Zhuo, Your Majesty's Prime Minister, 
has been slain by Wang Yun, and we are here to avenge him. We are no rebels, 
Sire. Let us only have Wang Yun, and we draw off our troops." 


Wang Yun was actually among the courtiers and at the Emperor's side. Hearing 
this demand he said, "The plan was made for the benefit of the Throne; but as this 
evil has grown therefrom, Your Majesty will not grudge losing me. | have brought 
about evil, and | will go down to these rebels." 


The Emperor was torn with sorrow and wavered. But the faithful minister leaped 
from the wall, crying, "Wang Yun is here." 


The two leaders drew their swords, crying, "For what crime was our master 
slain?" 


"His crimes filled the heavens and covered the earth; no tongue can tell them. 
The day he died was a day of rejoicing in the whole city as you well know," said 
Wang Yun. 


"And if he was guilty of some crime, what had we done not to be forgiven?" 


"Seditious rebels, why bandy words? | am ready to die." 


And Wang Yun was slain at the foot of the tower. 


Moved by the people's sufferings, 

Vexed at his prince's grief, 

Wang Yun compassed the traitor's death, 
That they might find relief. 

Every one knows him a hero, 

Leal to the state always: 

Living he guarded the princely towers, 
His soul keeps guard today. 


Having done the loyal minister to death at the Emperor's feet, they proceeded to 
exterminate also his whole family. Every one mourned. 


Then said the ruffians to each other, "Having gone so far what could be better 
than to make away with the Emperor and complete our scheme?" 


The traitor condoned his crime, 
Rebellion ought to cease; 

But his licentious followers 
Disturb the empire's peace. 


The fate of the Emperor will be disclosed in the next chapter. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 10: 
Gathering Arms, Ma Teng Moves To Rescue The Emperor; 
Commanding An Army, Cao Cao Marches to Avenges His Father. 


In the last chapter the two arch rebels, Li Jue and Guo Si, proposed to murder 
Emperor Xian, but their followers Zhang Ji and Fan Chou opposed this. 


"No; the people will not approve of his death now. Restore him to power, and get 
the leaguers inside Changan's control. Remove his supporters, and then we can 
compass his death. And the empire shall be in our hands." 


So they ceased the attack. The Emperor again spoke from the tower, saying, 
"Why do you still remain? You have slain Wang Yun; now withdraw these soldiers." 


Then Li Jue and Guo Si replied, "Your servants desire rank us a reward for their 
good service to your dynasty." 


"And what rank, Sirs?" 


All four wrote their wishes and handed them up to the Emperor who had no 
choice but to accede to the request, and they were created: 


Li Jue was appointed General of the Flying Cavalry, Lord of Chiyang, 
Commander of Capital District, Court Administrator, and granted Military Insignia. 


Guo Si was appointed General of the Rear Army, Lord of Meiyang, Court 
Administrator, and granted Military Insignia. 


Fan Chou was appointed General of the Right Army and Lord of Wanian. 
Zhang Ji was appointed General of the Flying Cavalry and Lord of Pingyan. 


Li Meng and Wang Fang, for opening the city gates, were appointed Imperial 
Commander. 


After receiving ranks of nobility, Li Jue and Guo Si thanked the Emperor, and 
went away to camp at Xunung, the suburb of Changan. The inferior rebel leaders 
also were gratified with ranks. And once more the capital was free of troops. 


Dong Zhuo's followers, having so far succeeded, did not forget their late leader. 
They sought his corpse for burial, but only a few fragments were discoverable. 
Then they had sculptors engrave a statue of fragrant wood in his likeness, laid that 
out in proper form, and instituted a noble's sacrifices and prayers. The remains 
were dressed in the robes of a prince, laid in a princely coffin for burial. They 
selected Meiwo for his tomb and having found an auspicious day conveyed the 
coffin thither. 


But a terrific thunder storm came on at the time of inhumation, and the ground 


was flooded. The coffin was rived asunder and the poor remains knocked out by 
thunders. A second time they buried the coffin, but a similar thing happened in the 
night. And yet a third time in another place but the earth rejected the remains. 
Meanwhile the thunder-fire had entirely consumed them. So it may be said justly 
that Heaven was exceedingly angry with Dong Zhuo. 


So now Li Jue and Guo Si wielded the real power of the scepter, and they were 
hard upon the people. They also removed the attendants from the Palace and 
replaced them by their own creatures, who maintained a most perfect watch over 
every movement of the Emperor so that he was greatly hampered and 
embarrassed. All appointments and demotions were made by the two rebels. For 
the sake of popularity they especially summoned Zhu Jun to court, made him 
Minister of the Palace Bureau and associated him with the government. 


One day came a report that the Governor of Xiliang, Ma Teng, and the Imperial 
Protector of Bingzhou, Han Sui, with one hundred thousand troops, are rapidly 
approaching the capital with the intention of attacking the rebels in the name of the 
Emperor. 


Now these leaders from the west had laid careful plans. Ma Teng and Han Sui 
had sent trusty friends to the capital to find out who would support them. They had 
conspired with three officials-~-Court Counselors Ma Yu and Chong Shao, and 
Imperial Commander Liu Fan-~-to be their inside allies and plot against the rebels. 
These three obtained from the Throne two secret edicts conferring the ranks of 
Commander Who Conquers the West on Ma Teng and Commander Who Guards 
the West on Han Sui. With these powers the two commanders joined forces and 
began their march. 


The four leaders of the party in power-~-Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, and Zhang Ji- 
~-held a consultation with their generals as to how to meet the attack. 


Adviser Jia Xu said, "Since the attackers are coming from a distance, our plan is 
to fortify and wait till shortage of food shall work for us. In a hundred days their 
supplies will be consumed, and they must retire. We can pursue and we shall 
capture them." 


Li Meng and Wang Fang rose and said, "This plan is bad. Give us ten thousand 
troops, and we will put an end to both of them and offer their heads before your 
ensign." 


"To fight forthwith means defeat," said Jia Xu. 


Li Meng and Wang Fang cried with one voice, "If we fail, we are willing to lose 
our heads; but if we win, then your head is forfeit." 


Jia Xu then suggested to Li Jue and Guo Si, saying, "Seventy miles west of the 


capital stand the Zhouzhi Hills. The passes are narrow and difficult. Send Generals 
Zhang Ji and Fan Chou to occupy this point of vantage and fortify themselves so 
that they may support Li Meng and Wang Fang." 


Li Jue and Guo Si accepted this advice. They told off fifteen thousand horse and 
foot, and Li Meng and Wang Fang left in high spirit. They made a camp ninety miles 
from Changan. 


The force from the west arrived; Ma Teng and Han Sui led out their troops to the 
attack. They found their opponents Li Meng and Wang Fang in battle array. Ma 
Teng and Han Sui rode to the front side by side. Pointing to the rebel leaders, the 
commanders abused them, crying, "Those are traitors; who will capture them?" 


Hardly were the words spoken when there came out a youth general with a 
clear, white complexion as jade, eyes like shooting stars, lithe of body and strong of 
limb. He was armed with a long spear and bestrode an excellent steed. This young 
leader was Ma Chao, son of Ma Teng, then seventeen years of age. 


Though young he was a supreme valiance. Wang Fang, despising him on 
account of his youth, galloped forth to fight him. Before they had exchanged many 
passes Wang Fang was disabled and fell to a thrust of the young Ma Chao's spear. 
The victor turned to retire into the formation, but Li Meng rode after Ma Chao to 
avenge his fallen colleague. Ma Chao did not see Li Meng, but his father called out 
"You are followed!" 


Hardly had Ma Teng spoken when he saw that the pursuer was a prisoner 
seated on his son's steed. Now Ma Chao had known he was followed, but 
pretended not to see, waiting till his enemy should have come close and lifted his 
spear to strike. Then Ma Chao suddenly wheeled about. The spear thrust met only 
empty air; and as the horses passed, Ma Chao's powerful arm shot out and pulled 
Li Meng from the saddle. Thus Li Meng and Wang Fang's soldiers were left 
leaderless and fled in all directions. The army of Ma Teng and Han Sui dashed in 
pursuit, and a complete victory was scored. They pressed into one of the passes 
and made a camp. Then they decapitated Li Meng and exposed his head. 


When Li Jue and Guo Si heard that both the boastful generals had fallen under 
the hand of one young man, they knew that Jia Xu had given good advice and was 
gifted with clear prescience. So they valued his plans the more highly and decided 
to act on the defensive. They refused all challenges to combat. 


Surely enough after a couple of months the supplies of the Xiliang force were all 
exhausted and the leaders began to consider retreat. 


Just at this juncture a household servant of Ma Yu's family betrayed his master 
and told of the conspiracy of the three court officials to assist the attackers. The two 
chiefs Li Jue and Guo Si in revenge seized the three conspirators-~-Ma Yu, Chong 


Shao, and Liu Fan-~-, with every member of their households, and beheaded them 
in the market place. The heads of the three were exposed at the front gate of the 
capital. 


Being short of food and hearing of the destruction of their three adherents in the 
city, the only course for Ma Teng and Han Sui was to retreat. At once Zhang Ji went 
in pursuit of Ma Teng, and Fan Chou followed Han Sui. The retreating army under 
Ma Teng was beaten, and only by Ma Chao's desperate efforts were the pursuers 
driven off. 


Fan Chou pursued the other army; and when he had come close, Han Sui rode 
boldly up and addressed him, saying, "You and |, Sir, are fellow villagers. Why then 
behave so unfriendly?" 


Fan Chou replied, "| must obey the commands of my chief." 


"| am here for the service of the state; why do you press me so hard?" said Han 
Sui. 


At this Fan Chou turned his horse, called in his troops, and left Han Sui in peace. 
Unwittingly a nephew of Li Jue had been a witness of this scene; and when he saw 
the enemy allowed to go free, he returned and told his uncle. Angry that his enemy 
had escaped, Li Jue would have sent an army to wreak vengeance on his general, 
but his adviser Jia Xu again came in, saying, "The people are yet unsettled, it was 
dangerous to provoke another war. Instead, invite Fan Chou to a banquet and, 
while the feast was in progress, executing him for dereliction of duty." 


This seemed good to Li Jue, so the banquet was prepared. Zhang Ji and Fan 
Chou accepted their invitations and went cheerfully. Toward the latter part of the 
entertainment a sudden change came over their host Li Jue, and he suddenly 
asked Fan Chou, "Why have you been intriguing with Han Sui? You are turning 
traitor, eh?" 


The unhappy guest was taken aback; and before he could frame his words to 
reply, he saw the assassins rush out with swords and axes. In a moment all was 
over, and Fan Chou's head lay beneath the table. 


Scared beyond measure, his fellow-guest Zhang Ji groveled on the floor. 


"Fan Chou was a traitor," said the host, raising Zhang Ji by the arm, "and he has 
his deserts; you are my friend and need not fear." 


Li Jue gave Zhang Ji command of Fan Chou's army with which Zhang Ji 
returned to his headquarters garrison in Hongnong. 


No one of the leaders among the leaguers dared attempt an attack on the party 


newly risen from Dong Zhuo's disaffection, while on the other hand Jia Xu never 
ceased to urge his masters to exert themselves for the welfare of the people and 
thus to tempt wise people to join them. And by these means the government began 
to prosper and the court to reassert its authority. 


However, a new trouble arose in the shape of a resurgence of Yellow Scarves in 
Qingzhou. They came, under numerous chieftains, in the number of hundreds of 
thousand and plundered any place they reached. Minister Zhu Jun said he knew of 
one who could destroy this sedition, and when asked who was the man he 
proposed, Zhu Jun said, "You want to destroy this horde of rebels; you will fail 
unless you get the services of Cao Cao." 


"And where is he?" asked Li Jue. 


"He is Governor of Dongjun. He has a large army, and you have only to order 
him to act; the rising will be broken." 


A messenger went post haste with a command for Cao Cao and Bao Xin, Lord of 
Jibei, to act together in quelling the rebellion. As soon as Cao Cao received the 
court command, he arranged with his colleague first to attack the rebels at 
Shouyang. Bao Xin made a dash right into their midst and inflicting damage 
wherever he could, but he was killed in a battle. Cao Cao pursued the rebels as 
they fled. Ten thousand surrendered. Then Cao Cao put his quondam enemies in 
the van; and when his army reached any place, many more surrendered and 
joined him. After three months of these tactics, he had won over many thousands, 
both of soldiers and ordinary folks. 


Of these new adherents the strongest and boldest were made the Qingzhou 
Army, and the others were sent home to their fields. In consequence of these 
successes Cao Cao's prestige and fame became very great and increased daily. 
He reported his success to Capital Changan and was rewarded with the title of 
General Who Guards the East. 


At his headquarters in Yanzhou, Cao Cao welcomed wise counselors and bold 
warriors, and many gathered around him. Two clever persons, uncle and nephew, 
came at the same time, both from Yanzhou, named Xun Yu and Xun You. The 
uncle had once been in the service of Yuan Shao. 


Cao Cao rejoiced when he had won the elder Xun to his side, saying, "Xun Yu is 
my Zhang Liang." 


He made Xun Yu a Marching General. The nephew Xun You was famed for his 
ability and had been in the court service when it was in Luoyang, but he had 
abandoned that career and retired to his village. Cao Cao made him a Military 
Instructor. 


Xun Yu said to Cao Cao, "There is a certain wise person of Yanzhou 
somewhere, but | do not know in whose service he is." 


"Who is he?" 
"Cheng Yu; he belongs to the eastern region of Yanzhou." 
"Yes; | have heard of him," said Cao Cao. 


So a messenger was sent to his native place to inquire. Cheng Yu was away in 
the hills engaged in study, but he came at Cao Cao's invitation. 


"| shall prove unworthy of your recommendation," said Cheng Yu to his friend 
Xun Yu, "for | am rough and ignorant. But have you forgotten a fellow villager of 
yours, Guo Jia? He is really able. Why not spread the net to catch him?" 


"| had nearly forgotten," said Xun Yu suddenly. 
So he told Cao Cao of this man, who was at once invited. 


Guo Jia, discussing the world at large with Cao Cao, recommended Liu Ye from 
Henan, who was a descendant of Liu Xiu the Founder of Latter Han. When Liu Ye 
had arrived, he was the means of inviting two more: Man Chong from Shanyang, 
and Lu Qian from Wucheng, who were already known to Cao Cao by reputation. 
These two brought to their new master's notice the name of Mao Jie from Chenliu, 
who also came and was given office. Then a famous leader, with his troop of some 
hundreds, arrived to offer service. This was Yu Jin of Taishan, an expert horseman 
and archer, and skilled beyond his fellows in every form of military exercise. He 
was made an army inspector. 


Then another day Xiahou Dun brought a fellow to present to Cao Cao. 
"Who is he?" asked Cao Cao. 


"He is from Chenliu and is named Dian Wei. He is the boldest of the bold, the 
strongest of the strong. He was one of Zhang Miao's people, but quarreled with his 
tent companions and killed some dozens of them with his fists. Then he fled to the 
mountains where | found him. | was out shooting and saw him follow a tiger across 
a stream. | persuaded him to join my troop and | recommend him." 


"| see he is no ordinary man," said Cao Cao. "He is fine and straight and looks 
very powerful and bold." 


"He is. He killed a man once to avenge a friend and carried his head through the 
whole market place. Hundreds saw him, but dared not come near. The weapon he 
uses now is a couple of spears, each weighs a hundred and twenty pounds, and 


he vaults into the saddle with these under his arm." 


Cao Cao bade the man give proof of his skill. So Dian Wei galloped to and fro 
carrying the spears. Then he saw away among the tents a huge banner swaying 
dangerously with the force of the wind and on the point of falling. A crowd of 
soldiers were vainly struggling to keep it steady. Down he leaped, shouted to the 
men to clear out and held the staff quite steady with one hand, keeping it perfectly 
upright in spite of the strong wind. 


"This is old E Lai again," said Cao Cao. 


He gave Dian Wei a post in the headquarters and besides made Dian Wei 
presents of an embroidered robe he was wearing and a swift steed with a 
handsome saddle. 


Cao Cao encouraged able people to assist him, and he had advisers on the civil 
side and valiant generals in the army. He became famous throughout the East of 
the Pass. 


Now Cao Cao's father, Cao Song, was living at Langye, whither he had gone as 
a place free from the turmoil of the partisan struggles. Now Cao Cao wished to be 
united with him. As a dutiful son, Cao Cao sent the Governor of Taishan, Ying 
Shao, to escort his father to Yanzhou. Old Cao Song read the letter with joy, and 
the family prepared to move. They were some forty in all, with a train of a hundred 
servants and many carts. 


Their road led through Xuzhou where the Imperial Protector, Tao Qian, was a 
sincere and upright man who had long wished to get on good terms with Cao Cao 
but, hitherto, had found no means of effecting a bond of union. Hearing that the 
family of the great man was passing through his region, Tao Qian went to welcome 
them, treated them with great cordiality, feasting and entertaining them for two 
days; and when they left, he escorted them to his boundary. Further he sent with 
them one General Zhang Kai with a special escort of five hundred. 


The whole party reached the county of Huafei. It was the end of summer, just 
turning into autumn, and at this place they were stopped by a tremendous storm of 
rain. The only shelter was an old temple and thither they went. The family occupied 
the main rooms and the escort the two side wings. The men of the escort were 
drenched, angry, and discontented. 


Then Zhang Kai called some of his petty officers to a secret spot and said, "We 
are old Yellow Scarves and only submitted to Tao Qian because there was no 
other choice. We have never got much out of it. Now here is the Cao family with no 
end of gear, and we can be rich very easily. We will make a sudden onslaught 
tonight at the third watch and slay the whole lot. Then we shall have plenty of 
treasure, and we will get away to the mountains." 


They all agreed. The storm continued into the night and as Cao Song sat waiting 
anxiously for signs of clearing, he suddenly heard a hubbub at the west end of the 
temple. His brother, Cao De, drawing his sword, went out to see what it was about, 
and Cao De was at once cut down. Cao Song seized one of the concubines by the 
hand, rushed with her through the passage toward the back of the temple so that 
they might escape. But the lady was stout and could not get through the narrow 
doors, so the two hid in one of the small outhouses at the side. However, they were 
seen and slain. 


The unhappy Governor Ying Shao fled for his life to Yuan Shao. The murderers 
fled into the South of River Huai with their plunder after having set fire to the old 
temple. 


Cao Cao, whom the ages praise, 
Slew his hosts on his former flight; 
Nemesis never turns aside, 
Murdered too his family died. 


Some of the escort escaped and took the evil tidings to Cao Cao. When he 
heard it he fell to the earth with a great cry. They raised him. With set teeth he 
muttered, "Tao Qian's people have slain my father: no longer can the same sky 
cover us. | will sweep Xuzhou off the face of the earth. Only thus can | satisfy my 
vengeance." 


Cao Cao left one small army of thirty thousand under Xun Yu and Cheng Yu to 
guard the east headquarters and the three counties of Juancheng, Fanxia, and 
Dongjun. Then he set forth with all the remainder to destroy Xuzhou and avenge 
his father. Xiahou Dun, Yu Jin, and Dian Wei were Van Leaders with Cao Cao's 
orders to slaughter all the inhabitants of each captured city. 


Now the Governor of Jiujiang, Bian Rang, was a close friend of Tao Qian. 
Hearing Xuzhou was threatened, Bian Rang set out with five thousand troops to his 
friend's aid. Angered by this move, Cao Cao sent Xiahou Dun to stop and kill Bian 
Rang while still on the march. 


At this time Chen Gong was in office in Dongjun, and he was also on friendly 
terms with Tao Qian. Hearing of Cao Cao's design to destroy the whole population, 
Chen Gong came in haste to see his former companion. Cao Cao knowing Chen 
Gong's errand put him off at first and would not see him. But then Cao Cao could 
not forget the kindness he had formerly received from Chen Gong, and presently 
the visitor was called to his tent. 


Chen Gong said, "They say you go to avenge your father's death on Xuzhou, to 


destroy its people. | have come to say a word. Imperial Protector Tao Qian is 
humane and a good man. He is not looking out for his own advantage, careless of 
the means and of others. Your worthy father met his unhappy death at the hands of 
Zhang Kai. Tao Qian is guiltless. Still more innocent are the people, and to slay 
them would be an evil. | pray you think over it." 


Cao Cao retorted angrily, "You once abandoned me and now you have the 
impudence to come to see me! Tao Qian slew my whole family, and | will tear his 
heart out in revenge. | swear it. You may speak for your friend and say what you 
will. | shall be as if | heard not." 


Intercession had failed. Chen Gong sighed and took his leave. 
He said, "Alas! | cannot go to Tao Qian and look upon his face." 


So Chen Gong rode off to the county of Chenliu to give service to Governor 
Zhang Miao. 


Cao Cao's army of revenge laid waste whatever place it passed through, slaying 
the people and desecrating their cemeteries. 


When Tao Qian heard the terrible tidings, he looked up to heaven, saying, "I 
must be guilty of some fault before Heaven to have brought this evil upon my 
people." 


He called together his officials to consult. One of them, Cao Bao, said, "Now the 
enemy is upon us; we cannot sit and await death with folded hands. | for one will 
help you to make a fight." 


Tao Qian reluctantly sent the army out. From a distance he saw Cao Cao's army 
spread abroad like frost and rushed far and wide like snow. In their midst was a 
large white flag and on both sides was written "Vengeance". 


When he had ranged his troops, Cao Cao rode out dressed in mourning white 
and abused Tao Qian. 


But Tao Qian advanced, and from beneath his ensign he bowed low and said, "I 
wished to make friends with you, Illustrious Sir, and so | sent Zhang Kai to escort 
your family. | knew not that his rebel heart was still unchanged. The fault does not 
lie at my door as you must see." 


"You old wretch, you killed my father and now you dare to mumble this 
nonsense," said Cao Cao. 


And he asked who would go out and seize Tao Qian. 


Xiahou Dun undertook this service and rode out. Tao Qian fled to the inner 
portion of his array; and as Xiahou Dun came on, Cao Bao went to meet him. But 
just as the two horses met, a hurricane burst over the spot, and the flying dust and 
pebbles threw both sides into the utmost confusion. Both drew off. 


Tao Qian retired into the city and called his officers to council. 


"The force against us is too strong," said he. "I will give myself up as a prisoner 
and let him wreak his vengeance on me. | may save the people." 


But a voice was heard saying, "You have long ruled here and the people love 
you. Strong as the enemy are, they are not necessarily able to break down our 
walls, especially when defended by you and your people. | have a scheme to 
suggest that | think will make Cao Cao die in a place where he will not find burial." 


These bold words startled the assembly, and they eagerly asked what the 


scheme was. 


Making overtures for friendship, Tao Qian encountered deadly hate. 
But, where danger seemed most threatening, he discovered safety's gate. 


The next chapter will disclose who the speaker was. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 11: 
Liu Bei Rescues Kong Rong At Beihai; 
Lu Bu Defeats Cao Cao Near Puyang. 


It was one Mi Zhu who said he knew how to defeat Cao Cao utterly. Mi Zhu came of 
a wealthy family of merchants in Donghai and trading in Luoyang. One day 
traveling homeward from that city in a carriage, he met an exquisitely beautiful lady 
trudging along the road, who asked him to let her ride. He stopped and yielded his 
place to her. She invited him to share the seat with her. He mounted, but sat rigidly 
upright, never even glancing in her direction. They traveled thus for some miles 
when she thanked him and alighted. Just as she left she said, "| am the Goddess of 
Fire from the Southern Land. | am on my way to execute a decree of the Supreme 
God to burn your dwelling, but your extreme courtesy has so deeply touched me 
that | now warn you. Hasten homeward, remove your valuables, for | must arrive 
tonight." 


Thereupon she disappeared. Mi Zhu hastily finished his journey and, as soon as 
he arrived, moved everything out of his house. Sure enough that night a fire started 
in the kitchen and involved the whole house. After this he devoted his wealth to 
relieving the poor and comforting the afflicted. Tao Qian gave him the magistracy 
office he then held. 


The plan Mi Zhu proposed was this: "I will go to Beihai and beg Governor Kong 
Rong to help. Another should go to Qingzhou on a similar mission to get the help 
from Imperial Protector Tien Kai. If the armies of these two places march on Cao 
Cao, he will certainly retire." 


Tao Qian accepted the plan and wrote two letters. He asked for a volunteer to go 
to Qingzhou, and a certain Chen Deng offered himself and, after he had left, Mi Zhu 
was formally entrusted with the mission to the north. Meanwhile Tao Qian and his 
generals would hold the city as they could. 


Kong Rong was a native of Qufu in the old state of Lu. He was one of the 
twentieth generation in descent from the great Teacher Confucius. Kong Rong had 
been noted as a very intelligent lad, somewhat precocious. When ten years old he 
had gone to see Li Ying, the Governor of Henan, but the doorkeeper demurred to 
letting him in. But when Kong Rong said, "I am Minister Li Ying's intimate friend," he 
was admitted. Li Ying asked Kong Rong what relations had existed between their 
families that might justify the term intimate. The boy replied, "Of old my ancestor 
Confucius questioned your ancestor, the Taoist sage Laozi, concerning 
ceremonies. So our families have known each other for many generations." Li Ying 
was astonished at the boy's ready wit. 


Presently High Minister Chen Wei visited, to whom Li Ying told the story of his 
youthful guest. "He is a wonder, this boy," said Li Ying, pointing to Kong Rong. 


Chen Wei replied, "It does not follow that a clever boy grows up into a clever 
man." 


The lad took him up at once saying, "By what you say, Sir, you were certainly 


one of the clever boys." 


The minister adviser and the governor all laughed, saying, "The boy is going to 
be a noble vessel." 


Thus from boyhood Kong Rong was famous. As a man he rose to be an Imperial 
Commander and was sent as Governor to Beihai, where he was renowned for 
hospitality. He used to quote the lines: 


"Let the rooms be full of friends, 
And the cups be full of wine. 
That is what | like." 


After six years at Beihai the people were devoted to him. The day that Mi Zhu 
arrived, Kong Rong was, as usual, seated among his guests, and the messenger 
was ushered in without delay. In reply to a question about the reason of the visit, Mi 
Zhu presented Tao Qian's letter which said that Cao Cao was pressing on Xuzhou 
City and the Imperial Protector prayed for help. 


Then said Kong Rong, "Your master and | are good friends, and your presence 
here constrains me to go to his aid. However, | have no quarrel with Cao Cao 
either, so | will first write to him to try to make peace. If he refuses my offer, then | 
must set the army in motion." 


"Cao Cao will not listen to proposals of peace; he is too certain of his strength," 
said Mi Zhu. 


Kong Rong wrote his letter and also gave orders to muster his troops. Just at this 
moment happened another rising of the Yellow Scarves, ten thousand of them, and 
the ruffians began to rob and murder at Beihai. It was necessary to deal with them 
first, and Kong Rong led his army outside the city. 


The rebel leader, Guan Hai, rode out to the front, saying, "| know this county is 
fruitful and can well spare ten thousand carts of grain. Give me that and we retire; 
refuse, and we will batter down the city walls and destroy every soul." 


Kong Rong shouted back, "| am a servant of the great Hans, entrusted with the 
safety of their land. Think you | will feed rebels ?" 


Guan Hai whipped his steed, whirled his sword around his head and rode 
forward. Zong Bao, one of Kong Rong's generals, set his spear and rode out to give 
battle, but after a very few bouts Zong Bao was cut down. Soon the soldiers fell into 
panic and rushed pell-mell into the city for protection. The rebels then laid siege to 
the city on all sides. Kong Rong was very down-hearted; and Mi Zhu, who now saw 


no hope for the success of his mission, was grieved beyond words. 


The sight from the city wall was exceeding sad, for the rebels were there in 
enormous numbers. One day standing on the wall, Kong Rong saw afar a man 
armed with a spear riding hard in among the Yellow Scarves and scattering them 
before him like chaff before the wind. Before long the man had reached the foot of 
the wall and called out, "Open the gate!" 


But the defenders would not open to an unknown man, and in the delay a crowd 
of rebels gathered round the rider along the edge of the moat. Suddenly wheeling 
about, the warrior dashed in among them and bowled over a dozen at which the 
others fell back. At this Kong Rong ordered the wardens to open the gates and let 
the stranger enter. As soon as he was inside, he dismounted, laid aside his spear, 
ascended the wall, and made humble obeisance to the Governor. 


"My name is Taishi Ci, and | am from the county of Laihuang. | only returned 
home yesterday from the north to see my mother, and then | heard that your city 
was in danger from a rebel attack. My mother said you had been very kind to her 
and told me | should try to help. So | set out all alone and here | am." 


This was cheering. Kong Rong already knew Taishi Ci by reputation as a valiant 
fighting man, although they two had never met. The son being far away from his 
home, Kong Rong had taken his mother, who dwelt a few miles from the city, under 
his especial protection and saw that she did not suffer from want. This had won the 
old lady's heart and she had sent her son to show her gratitude. 


Kong Rong showed his appreciation by treating his guest with the greatest 
respect, making him presents of clothing and armor, saddles and horses. 


Presently said Taishi Ci, "Give me a thousand soldiers, and | will go out and 
drive off these fellows." 


"You are a bold warrior, but these are very numerous. It is a serious matter to go 
out among them," said Kong Rong. 


"My mother sent me because of your goodness to her. How shall | be able to 
look her in the face if | do not raise the siege? | would prefer to conquer or perish." 


"| have heard Liu Bei is one of the heroes in the world; and if we could get his 
help, there would be no doubt of the result. But there is no one to send." 


"| will go as soon as | have received your letter." 
So Kong Rong wrote letters and gave them to his helper. 


Taishi Ci put on his armor, mounted his steed, attached his bow and quiver to 


his girdle, took his spear in his hand, tied his packed haversack firmly to his saddle 
bow, and rode out at the city gate. He went quite alone. 


Along the moat a large party of the besiegers were gathered, and they came to 
intercept the solitary rider. But Taishi Ci dashed in among them and cut down 
several and so finally fought his way through. 


Guan Hai, hearing that a rider had left the city, guessed what his errand would 
be and followed Taishi Ci with a party of horsemen. Guan Hai spread them out so 
that the messenger rider was entirely surrounded. Then Taishi Ci laid aside his 
spear, took his bow, adjusted his arrows one by one and shot all round him. And as 
a rider fell from his steed with every twang of Taishi Ci's bowstring, the pursuers 
dared not close in. 


Thus he got clear away and rode in hot haste to Liu Bei. Taishi Ci reached 
Pingyuan, and after greeting his host in proper form he told how Kong Rong was 
surrounded and had sent him for help. Then he presented the letter which Liu Bei 
read. 


"And who are you?" asked Liu Bei. 


"lam Taishi Ci, a fellow from Laihuang. | am not related by ties of kin to Kong 
Rong, nor even by ties of neighborhood, but | am by the bonds of sentiment and | 
share his sorrows and misfortunes. The Yellow Scarves have invested his city, and 
he is distressed with none to turn to, and destruction is very near. You are known 
as humane, righteous, and eager to help the distressed. Therefore at his command 
| have braved all dangers and fought my way through his enemies to pray you save 
him." 


Liu Bei smiled, saying, "And does he know there is a Liu Bei in this world?" 


So Liu Bei, together with Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, told off three thousand troops 
and set out to help raise the siege. When the rebel leader Guan Hai saw these new 
forces arriving; he led out his army to fight them, thinking he could easily dispose of 
so small a force. 


The brothers and Taishi Ci with them sat on their horses in the forefront of their 
array. Guan Hai hastened forward. Taishi Ci was ready to fight, but Guan Yu had 
opened the combat. He rode forth and the two steeds met. The soldiers set up a 
great shout, for how could there be any doubt of the result? After a few bouts Guan 
Yu's green-dragon saber rose and fell, and with the stroke fell the rebel leader. 


This was the signal for Zhang Fei and Taishi Ci to take a share, and they 
advanced side by side. With their spears ready they dashed in, and Liu Bei urged 
forward his force. The besieged Governor saw his doughty rescuers laying low the 
rebels as tigers among a flock of sheep. None could withstand them, and he then 


sent out his own troops to join in the battle so that the rebels were between two 
armies. The rebels' force was completely broken and many troops surrendered, 
while the remainder scattered in all directions. 


The victors were welcomed into the city, and as soon as possible a banquet was 
prepared in their honor. Mi Zhu was presented to Liu Bei. Mi Zhu related the story 
of the murder of Cao Song by Zhang Kai, Cao Cao's vengeful attack on Xuzhou, 
and his coming to beg for assistance. 


Liu Bei said, "Imperial Protector Tao Qian is a kindly man of high character, and 
it is a pity that he should suffer this wrong for no fault of his own." 


"You are a scion of the imperial family," said Governor Kong Rong, "and this Cao 
Cao is injuring the people, a strong man abusing his strength. Why not go with me 
to rescue the sufferers?" 


"| dare not refuse, but my force is weak and | must act cautiously," said Liu Bei. 


"Though my desire to help arises from an old friendship, yet it is a righteous act 
as well. | do not think your heart is not inclined toward the right," said Kong Rong. 


Liu Bei said, "This being so, you go first and give me time to see Gongsun Zan 
from whom | may borrow more troops and horses. | will come anon." 


"You surely will not break your promise?" said the Governor. 


"What manner of man think you that | am?" said Liu Bei. "The wise one said, 
‘Death is common to all; the person without truth cannot maintain the self.' Whether 
| get the troops or not, certainly | shall myself come." 


So the plan was agreed to. Mi Zhu set out to return forthwith while Kong Rong 
prepared for his expedition. 


Taishi Ci took his leave, saying, "My mother bade me come to your aid, and now 
happily you are safe. Letters have come from my fellow townsman, Liu Yao, 
Imperial Protector of Yangzhou, calling me thither and | must go. | will see you 
again." 


Kong Rong pressed rewards upon Taishi Ci, but he would accept nothing and 
departed. When his mother saw him, she was pleased at his success saying she 
rejoiced that he had been able to prove his gratitude, and after this he departed for 
Yangzhou. 


Liu Bei went away to his friend Gongsun Zan and laid before Gongsun Zan his 
design to help Xuzhou. 


"Cao Cao and you are not enemies; why do you spend yourself for the sake of 
another?" said Gongsun Zan. 


"| have promised," Liu Bei replied, "and dare not break faith." 
"| will lend you two thousand horse and foot," said Gongsun Zan. 
"Also | wish to have the services of Zhao Yun," said Liu Bei. 


Gongsun Zan agreed to this also. They marched away, Liu Bei's own troops 
being in the front, and Zhao Yun, with the borrowed troops, being in rear. 


In due course Mi Zhu returned saying that Kong Rong had also obtained the 
services of Liu Bei. The other messenger, Chen Deng, came back and reported 
that Tien Kai would also bring help. Then was Tao Qian's heart set at ease. 


But both the leaders, though they had promised aid, greatly dreaded their 
antagonist and camped among the hills at a great distance, fearful of coming to 
close quarters. Cao Cao knew of their coming and divided his army into parts to 
meet them, so postponing the attack on the city itself. 


Presently Liu Bei came up and went to see Kong Rong, who said, "The enemy is 
very powerful, and Cao Cao handles his army skillfully. We must be cautious. Let 
us make most careful observations before we strike a blow." 


"What | fear is famine in the city," said Liu Bei. "They cannot hold out very long. | 
will put my troops with yours under your command, while | with Zhang Fei make a 
dash through to see Tao Qian and consult with him." 


Kong Rong approved of this, so he and Tien Kai took up positions on the ox- 
horn formation, with Guan Yu and Zhao Yun on either side to support them. 


When Liu Bei and Zhang Fei leading one thousand troops made their dash to 
get through Cao Cao's army, they got as far as the flank of his camp when there 
arose a great beating of drums, and horse and foot rolled out like billows on the 
ocean. The leader was Yu Jin. He checked his steed and called out, "You mad men 
from somewhere, where are you going?" 


Zhang Fei heard Yu Jin but deigned no reply. He only rode straight to attack the 
speaker. After they had fought a few bouts, Liu Bei waved his double swords as 
signal for his troops to come on, and they drove Yu Jin before them. Zhang Fei led 
the pursuit and in this way they reached the city wall. 


From the city wall the besieged saw a huge banner embroidered in white "Liu 
Bei of Pingyuan," and the Imperial Protector bade them open the gate for the 
rescuers to enter. Liu Bei was made very welcome, conducted to the residency, 


and a banquet prepared in his honor. The soldiers also were feasted. 


Tao Qian was delighted with Liu Bei, admiring his high-spirited appearance and 
clear speech. Tao Qian bade Mi Zhu offer Liu Bei the seal and insignia of the 
protectorship office. But Liu Bei shrank back startled. 


"What does this mean?" said Liu Bei. 


Tao Qian said, "There is trouble on every side, and the kingly rule is no longer 
maintained. You, Sir, are a member of the family and eminently fitted to support 
them and their prerogatives. | am verging on senility, and | wish to retire in your 
favor. | pray you not to decline, and | will report my action to the court." 


Liu Bei started up from his seat and bowed before his host saying, "Scion of the 
family | may be, but my merit is small and my virtue meager. | doubt my fitness even 
for my present post, and only a feeling of doing right sent me to your assistance. To 
hear such speech makes me doubt. Surely you think | came with greed in my heart. 
May God help me no more if | cherished such a thought." 


"It is a poor old man's real sentiment," said Tao Qian. 


Time after time Tao Qian renewed his offer to entrust the region of Xuzhou to Liu 
Bei, but Liu Bei kept refusing. 


In the midst of this came Mi Zhu, saying, "The enemies had reached the wall, 
and something must be done to drive them off. The present matter could await a 
more tranquil time." 


Said Liu Bei, "| ought to write to Cao Cao to press him to raise the siege. If he 
refuses, we will attack forthwith." 


Orders were sent to the three camps outside to remain quiescent till the letter 
could reach Cao Cao. 


It happened that Cao Cao was holding a council when a messenger with a war 
letter was announced. The letter was brought in and handed to him and, when he 
had opened and looked at it, he found it was from Liu Bei. 


This is the letter, very nearly: 


"Since meeting you outside the pass, fate has assigned us to different quarters 
of the world, and | have not been able to pay my respects to you. Touching the 
death of your noble father, it was owing to the vicious nature of Zhang Kai and due 
to no fault of Tao Qian. Now while the remnant of the Yellow Scarves is disturbing 
the lands, and Dong Zhuo's partisans have the upper hand in the capital, | wish that 
you, Illustrious Sir, would regard the critical position of the court rather than your 


personal grievances, and so divert your forces from the attack on Xuzhou to the 
rescue of the state. Such would be for the happiness of that city and the whole 
world." 


Cao Cao gave vent to a torrent of abuse: "Who is this Liu Bei that he dares write 
and exhort me? Beside, he means to be satirical." 


Cao Cao issued orders to put the bearer of the letter to death and to press on the 
siege. But Guo Jia remonstrated, saying, "Liu Bei has come from afar to help Tao 
Qian, and he is trying the effect of politeness before resorting to arms. | pray you, 
my lord, reply with fair words that his heart may be lulled with a feeling of safety. 
Then attack with vigor and the city will fall." 


Cao Cao found this advice good, so he spared the messenger, telling him to 
wait to carry back his reply. While this was going on, a horseman came with news 
of misfortune: "Lu Bu has invaded Yanzhou, now holding Puyang. The three 
counties left-~-Juancheng, Fanxia, and Dongjun-~-are under severe attacks." 


When Li Jue and Guo Si, the two partisans of Dong Zhuo, succeeded in their 
attack on the capital, Lu Bu had fled to Yuan Shu. However, Yuan Shu looked 
askance at him for his instability and refused to receive him. Then Lu Bu went to try 
Yuan Shao, who was a brother of Yuan Shu. Yuan Shao accepted the warrior and 
made use of him in an attack upon Zhang Yan in Changshan. But his success filled 
him with pride, and his arrogant demeanor so annoyed the other commanders that 
Yuan Shao was on the point of putting him to death. To escape this Lu Bu had 
gone away to Zhang Yang, Governor of Shangdang, who accepted his services. 


About this time Pang Shu, who had been hiding and protecting Lu Bu's family in 
Changan since his disappearance, restored them to him. This deed angered Li Jue 
and Guo Si so that they put Pang Shu to death and wrote to Lu Bu's protector to 
serve him the same. To escape this Lu Bu once again had to flee and this time 
joined himself to Zhang Miao. 


Lu Bu arrived just as Zhang Miao's brother, Zhang Chao, was introducing Chen 
Gong. 


Chen Gong said to Zhang Miao, "The rupture of the empire has begun, and 
warriors are seizing what they can. It is strange that you, with all the advantages of 
population and provisions you enjoy, do not strike for independence. Cao Cao has 
gone on an expedition against the east, leaving his own territory defenseless. Lu 
Bu is one of the fighting people of the day. If you and he together attacked and got 
Yanzhou, you could then proceed to the dominion." 


Zhang Miao was pleased and resolved to try. He ordered an attack, and soon Lu 
Bu was in possession of Yanzhou and its neighborhood, all but three small 
counties of Juancheng, Fanxia, and Dongjun, which were vigorously and 


desperately defended by Xun Yu and Cheng Yu in concert. Cao Cao's cousin, Cao 
Ren, had fought many battles but was repeatedly defeated, and the messenger 
with the evil tidings had come from him asking prompt help. 


Cao Cao was greatly disturbed by this and said, "If my own region be lost, | have 
no home to return to. | must do something at once." 


"The best thing would be to become friends with Liu Bei at any cost and return to 
Yanzhou," said Guo Jia. 


Then Cao Cao wrote to Liu Bei, gave the letter to the waiting messenger and 
broke camp. The news that the enemy had left was very gratifying to Tao Qian, who 
then invited his various defenders into Xuzhou City and prepared banquets and 
feasts in token of his gratitude. 


At one of these, when the feasting was over, he proceeded with his wish of 
retirement in favor of Liu Bei. Placing Liu Bei in the seat of highest honor, Tao Qian 
bowed before him and then addressed the assembly, "I am old and feeble, and my 
two sons lack the ability to hold so important an office as this. The noble Liu Bei is a 
descendant of the imperial house. He is of lofty virtue and great talent. Let him then 
take over the rule of this region, and only too willingly | shall retire to have leisure to 
nurse my health." 


Liu Bei replied, "| came at the request of Governor Kong Rong, because it was 
the right thing to do. Xuzhou is saved; but if | take it, surely the world will say |ama 
wicked man." 


Mi Zhu said, "You may not refuse. The House of Han is falling; their realm is 
crumbling, and now is the time for doughty deeds and signal services. This is a 
fertile region, well populated and rich, and you are the man to rule over it." 


"But | cannot accept," said Liu Bei. 


"Imperial Protector Tao Qian is a great sufferer," said Chen Deng, "and cannot 
see to matters. You may not decline, Sir." 


Said Liu Bei, "Yuan Shu belongs to a family of rulers, who have held the highest 
offices of state four times in three generations. The multitude people respects him. 
Why not invite him to this task?" 


"Because Yuan Shu is a drying skeleton in a dark tomb; not worth talking about. 
This opportunity is a gift from Heaven, and you will never cease to regret its loss," 
said Kong Rong. 


So spoke Kong Rong, but still Liu Bei obstinately refused. Tao Qian besought 
him with tears, saying, "I shall die if you leave me, and there will be none to close 


my eyes." 
"Brother, you should accept the offer thus made," said Guan Yu. 


"Why so much fuss?" said Zhang Fei. "We have not taken the place; it is he who 
wishes to give it you." 


"You all persuade me to do what is wrong," said Liu Bei. 


Seeing he could not persuade Liu Bei, Tao Qian then said, "As you are set in 
determination, perhaps you will consent to encamp at Xiaopei. It is only a little 
town, but thence you can keep watch and ward over the region." 


They all with one voice prayed Liu Bei to consent, so he gave in. The feast of 
victory being now ended, the time came to say farewell. When Zhao Yun took his 
leave, Liu Bei held his hands alternately while dashing away the falling tears. Kong 
Rong and Tien Kai went home to their own places. 


When Liu Bei and his brothers took up their abode in Xiaopei, they first repaired 
the defenses, and then they put out proclamations in order to calm the inhabitants. 


In the meantime Cao Cao had marched toward his own region. Cao Ren met 
and told him, "Lu Bu is very powerful, and he has Chen Gong as adviser. Yanzhou 
is as good as lost, with the exception of three counties which have been vigorously 
and desperately defended by Xun Yu and Cheng Yu." 


Cao Cao said, "| own that Lu Bu is a bold fighter but nothing more; he has no 
craft. So we need not fear him seriously." 


Then he gave orders to make a strong camp till they could think out some 
victorious plan. 


Lu Bu, knowing of Cao Cao's return, called two of his subordinate generals, Xue 
Lan and Li Feng, to him and assigned to them the task of holding the city of 
Yanzhou, saying, "| have long waited for opportunity to employ your skill; now | give 
you ten thousand soldiers, and you are to hold the city while | go forth to attack Cao 
Cao." 


They accepted. But Chen Gong, the strategist, came in hastily, saying, "General, 
you are going away; whither?" 


"lam going to camp my troops at Puyang, that vantage point." 
"You are making a mistake," said Chen Gong. "The two you have chosen to 


defend this city are unequal to the task. For this expedition remember that about 
sixty miles due south, on the treacherous road to the Taishan Mountains, is a very 


advantageous position where you should place your best men in ambush. Cao 
Cao will hasten homeward by double marches when he hears what has happened; 
and if you strike when half his troops have gone past this point, you may seize him." 


Said Lu Bu, "| am going to occupy Puyang and see what develops. How can you 
guess my big plan?" 


So Lu Bu left Xue Lan in command at Yanzhou and went away. 


Now when Cao Cao approached the dangerous part of the road near the 
Taishan Mountains, Guo Jia warned him to take care as there was doubtless an 
ambush. But Cao Cao laughed, saying, "We know all Lu Bu's dispositions. Xue Lan 
is keeping the city. Do you think Lu Bu has laid an ambush? | shall tell Cao Ren to 
besiege Yanzhou, and | shall go to Puyang." 


In Puyang, when Chen Gong heard of the enemy's approach he spoke, saying, 
"The enemy will be fatigued with long marches so attack quickly before they have 
time to recover." 


Lu Bu replied, "I, a single horseman, am afraid of none. | go and come as | will. 
Think you | fear this Cao Cao? Let him settle his camp; | will take him after that." 


Now Cao Cao neared Puyang, and he made a camp. The next day he led out 
his commanders, and they arrayed their armies in open country. Cao Cao took up 
his station on horseback between the two standards, watching while his opponents 
arrived and formed up in a circular area. Lu Bu was in front, followed by eight of his 
generals, all strong men: Zhang Liao of Mayi, backed by Hao Meng, Cao Xing, and 
Cheng Lian; Zang Ba of Huaying, backed by Wei Xu, Song Xian, and Hou Cheng. 
They led an army of fifty thousand in total. 


The drums began their thunderous roll; and Cao Cao, pointing to his opponent, 
said, "You and | had no quarrel, why then did you invade my land?" 


"The empire of Han is the possession of all; what is your special claim?" said Lu 
Bu. 


So saying, Lu Bu ordered Zang Ba to ride forth and challenge. From Cao Cao's 
side the challenge was accepted by Yue Jin. The two steeds approached each 
other; two spears were lifted both together, and they exchanged near thirty blows 
with no advantage to either. Then Xiahou Dun rode out to help his colleague and, 
in reply, out went Zhang Liao from Lu Bu's side. And they four fought. 


Then fierce anger seized upon Lu Bu. Setting his trident halberd, he urged his 
Red-Hare forward to where the fight was waging. Seeing him approach, Xiahou 
Dun and Yue Jin both fled, but Lu Bu pressed on after them, and Cao Cao's army 
lost the day. Retiring ten miles, they made a new camp. Lu Bu called in and 


mustered his troops. 


The day having gone against him, Cao Cao called a council, and Yu Jin said, 
"From the hill tops today | saw a camp of our enemies on the west of Puyang. They 
were but few men therein, and tonight after today's victory, it will not be defended. 
Let us attack; and if we can take the camp, we shall strike fear into the heart of Lu 
Bu. This is our best plan." 


Cao Cao thought so too. He and six of his generals-~-Cao Hong, Li Dian, Mao 
Jie, Lu Qian, Yu Jin, and Dian Wei-~-and twenty thousand horse and foot left that 
night by a secret road for the camp. 


In his camp Lu Bu was rejoicing for that day's victory, when Chen Gong 
reminded him, saying, "The western camp is importance point, and it might be 
attacked." 


But Lu Bu replied, "The enemy will not dare approach after today's defeat." 


"Cao Cao is a very able commander," replied Chen Gong. "You must keep a 
good lookout for him lest he attack our weak spot." 


So arrangements were made for defense. Generals Gao Shun, Wei Xu, and Hou 
Cheng were ordered to march there. At dusk Cao Cao reached the camp and 
began an immediate attack on all four sides. The defenders could not hold him off. 
They ran in all directions, and the camp was captured. Near the fourth watch, when 
the defending party came, Cao Cao sallied forth to meet them and met Gao Shun. 
Another battle then began and waged till dawn. About that time a rolling of drums 
was heard in the west, and they told Cao Cao that Lu Bu himself was at hand. 
Thereupon Cao Cao abandoned the attack and fled. 


Gao Shun, Wei Xu, and Hou Cheng pursued him, Lu Bu taking the lead. Cao 
Cao's two generals, Yu Jin and Yue Jin, attacked the pursuers but could not check 
them. Cao Cao went away north. But from behind some hills came out Zhang Liao 
and Zang Ba to attack. Lu Qian and Cao Hong were sent to stop the attackers, but 
Lu Qian and Cao Hong were both defeated. Cao Cao sought safety in the west. 
Here again his retreat was met by Lu Bu's four generals, Hao Meng, Cao Xing, 
Cheng Lian, and Song Xian. 


The fight became desperate. Cao Cao dashed at the enemy's array. The din was 
terrible. Arrows fell like pelting rain upon them, and they could make no headway. 
Cao Cao was desperate and cried out in fear, "Who can save me?" 


Then from the crush dashed out Dian Wei with his double spears, crying, "Fear 
not, my master." 


Dian Wei leapt from his steed, leaned his double spears against a wall and laid 


hold of a handful of battle-axes. Turning to his followers he said, "When the ruffians 
are at ten paces, call out to me." 


Then he set off with mighty strides, plunging forward, careless of the flying 
arrows. Lu Bu's horsemen followed, and when they got near, Dian Wei's followers 
shouted, "Ten paces!" 


"Five, then call!" shouted back Dian Wei, and went on. 
Presently, "Five paces!" 


Then Dian Wei spun round and flung the battle-axes. With every fling a man fell 
from the saddle and never a battle-ax missed. 


Having thus slain ten or so the remainder fled, and Dian Wei quickly remounted 
his steed, set his twin spears and rushed again into the fight with a vigor that none 
could withstand. One by one his opponents yielded, and he was able to lead Cao 
Cao safely out of the press of battle. Cao Cao and his commanders went to their 
camp. 


But as evening fell, the noise of pursuit fell on their ears, and soon appeared Lu 
Bu himself. 


"Cao Cao, you rebel, do not flee!" shouted Lu Bu as he approached with his 
halberd ready for a thrust. 


All stopped and looked in each others' faces: the soldiers were weary, their 
steeds spent. Fear smote them, and they looked around for some place of refuge. 


You may lead your lord safely out of the press, 
But what if the enemy follow? 


We cannot say here what Cao Cao's fate was, but the next chapter will relate. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 12: 
Tao Qian Thrice Offers Xuzhou To Liu Bei; 
Cao Cao Retakes Yanzhou From Lu Bu In Battles. 


The last chapter closed with Cao Cao in great danger. However, help came. 
Xiahou Dun with a body of soldiers found his chief, checked the pursuit, and fought 
with Lu Bu till dusk. Rain fell in torrents swamping everything; and as the daylight 
waned, they drew off and Cao Cao reached camp. He rewarded Dian Wei 
generously and advanced him in rank. 


When Lu Bu reached his camp, he called in his adviser Chen Gong. Then Chen 
Gong proposed a new stratagem. 


He said, "In Puyang there is a rich, leading family, Tian by name, who number 
thousands, enough to populate a whole county in themselves. Make one of these 
people go to Cao Cao's camp with a pretended secret letter about Lu Bu's ferocity, 
and the hatred of the people, and their desire to be rid of him. End by saying that 
only Gao Shun is left to guard the city, and they would help any one who would 
come to save them. Thus our enemy Cao Cao will be inveigled into the city, and we 
will destroy him either by fire or ambush. His skill may be equal to encompassing 
the universe, but he will not escape." 


Lu Bu thought this trick might be tried, and they arranged for the Tian family letter 
to be sent. 


Coming soon after the defeat, when Cao Cao felt uncertain what step to take 
next, the secret letter was read with joy. It promised interior help and said the sign 
should be a white flag with the word "Rectitude" written thereon. 


"Heaven is going to give me Puyang," said Cao Cao joyfully. 


So he rewarded the messenger very liberally and began to prepare for the 
expedition. Then came Liu Ye, saying, "Lu Bu is no strategist, but Chen Gong is full 
of guile; | fear treachery in this letter, and you must be careful. If you will go, then 
enter with only one third your army, leaving the others outside the city as a 
reserve." 


Cao Cao agreed to take this precaution. He went to Puyang, which he found gay 
with fluttering flags. Looking carefully he saw among them, at the west gate, the 
white flag with the looked-for inscription. His heart rejoiced. 


That day, just about noon, the city gates opened, and two bodies of soldiers 


appeared as if to fight. Gao Shun was the front commander, and Hou Cheng the 
rear commander. Cao Cao told off his general, Dian Wei, to oppose them. Neither 
body, however, came on to full engagement but fell back into the city. By this move 
Dian Wei and his troops had been drawn close up to the drawbridge. From within 
the city several soldiers were seen taking any chance of confusion to escape and 
come outside. To Cao Cao they said, "We are clients of the Tian family," and they 
gave him secret letters stating: 


"The signal will be given about the first watch setting by beating a gong. That will 
be the time to attack. The gates will be opened." 


So Cao Cao ordered Xiahou Dun to march to the left and Cao Hong to the right. 
Cao Cao led the main army-~-together with Xiahou Yuan, Li Dian, and Yue Jin-~- 
into the city. Li Dian pressed upon his master the precaution, saying, "My lord 
should stay outside the city; let us go in first." 


But Cao Cao bade him be silent, saying, "If | do not go, who will advance?" 


And so at the first watch Cao Cao led the way. The moon had not yet arisen. As 
he drew near the west gate, they heard a crackling sound, then a loud shouting, 
and then torches moved hither and thither. Next the gates were thrown wide open, 
and Cao Cao, whipping up his steed, galloped in. 


But when he reached the state residence, he noticed the streets were quite 
deserted, and then he knew he had been tricked. Wheeling round his horse, he 
shouted to his followers to retire. This was the signal for another move. An 
explosion of a signal bomb was heard close at hand, and it was echoed from every 
side in a deafening roar. Gongs and drums beat all around with a roar like rivers 
rushing backward to their source, and the ocean boiling up from its depths. From 
two sides east and west came bodies of soldiers eager to attack, led by Lu Bu's 
generals Zhang Liao and Zang Ba. 


Cao Cao dashed off toward the north only to find his way barred by Hao Meng 
and Cao Xing. Cao Cao tried for the south gate, but met enemies led by Gao Shun 
and Hou Cheng. Cao Cao's trusty commander Dian Wei, with fierce eyes and 
gritting teeth, at last burst through and got out, with the enemy close after him. 

But when Dian Wei reached the drawbridge, he glanced behind him and missed 
his master. Immediately Dian Wei turned back and cut an arterial alley inside. Just 
within he met Li Dian. 

"Where is our lord?" cried Dian Wei. 

"lam looking for him," said Li Dian. 


"Quick! Get help from outside," shouted Dian Wei. "I will seek him." 


So Li Dian hastened for aid, and Dian Wei slashed his way in, looking on every 
side for Cao Cao. He was not to be found. Dashing out of the city, Dian Wei ran up 
against Yue Jin, who asked where their lord was. 


"| have entered the city twice in search of him, but cannot find him," said Dian 
Wei. 


"Let us go in together," said Yue Jin. 


They rode up to the gate. But the noise of bombs from the gate tower frightened 
Yue Jin's horse so that it refused to pass. Wherefore Dian Wei alone went in, 
butting through the smoke and dashing through the flames. But he got in and 
searched on every side. 


When Cao Cao saw his sturdy protector Dian Wei cut his way out and disappear 
leaving him surrounded, he again made an attempt to reach the north gate. On the 
way, sharply outlined against the glow, he saw the figure of Lu Bu coming toward 
him with his trident halberd ready to kill. Cao Cao covered his face with his hand, 
whipped up his steed and galloped past. But Lu Bu came galloping up behind him 
and tapping him on the helmet with the halberd cried, "Where is Cao Cao?" 


Cao Cao turned and, pointing to a dun horse well ahead, cried, "There; on that 
dun! That's he." 


Hearing this Lu Bu left pursuing Cao Cao to gallop after the rider of the dun. 


Thus relieved Cao Cao set off for the east gate. Then he fell in with Dian Wei, 
who took him under his protection and fought through the press, leaving a trail of 
death behind till they reached the gate. Here the fire was raging fiercely, and 
burning beams were falling on all sides. The earth element seemed to have 
interchanged with the fire element. Dian Wei warded off the burning pieces of wood 
with his lance and rode into the smoke making a way for his lord. Just as they were 
passing through the gate a flaming beam fell from the gate tower. Cao Cao just 
warded it off with his arm, but it struck his steed on the quarters and knocked the 
steed down. Cao Cao's hand and arm were badly burned and his hair and beard 
singed. Dian Wei turned back to his rescue. Luckily Xiahou Yuan came along just 
then, and the two raised Cao Cao and set him on Xiahou Yuan's horse. And thus 
they got him out of the burning city. But they had to go through heavy fighting till 
daybreak. 


Cao Cao returned to his camp. His officers crowded about his tent, anxious for 
news of his health. He soon recovered and laughed when he thought of his 
escape. 


"| blundered into that fool's trap, but | will have my revenge," said he. 


"Let us have a new plan soon," said Guo Jia. 


"| will turn his trick to my own use. | will spread the false report that | was burned 
in the fire, and that | died at the fifth watch. He will come to attack as soon as the 
news gets abroad, and | will have an ambush ready for him in Maling Hills. | will get 
him this time." 


"Really a fine stratagem!" said Guo Jia. 


So the soldiers were put into mourning, and the report went everywhere that 
Cao Cao was dead. And soon Lu Bu heard it, and he assembled his army at once 
to make a surprise attack, taking the road by the Maling Hills to his enemy's camp. 


As he was passing the hills, he heard the drums beating for an advance, and the 
ambushing soldiers leapt out all round him. Only by desperate fighting did he get 
out of the melee and with a sadly diminished force returned to his camp at Puyang. 
There he strengthened the fortifications and could not be tempted forth to battle. 


This year locusts suddenly appeared, and they consumed every green blade. 
There was a famine, and in the northeast grain rose to fifty "strings" of cash a cart. 
People even took to cannibalism. Cao Cao's army suffered from want, and he 
marched them to Juancheng. Lu Bu took his troops to Shanyang. Perforce 
therefore the fighting ceased. 


In Xuzhou. Imperial Protector Tao Qian, over sixty years of age, suddenly fell 
seriously ill, and he summoned his confident, Mi Zhu, to his chamber to make 
arrangements for the future. As to the situation the adviser said, "Cao Cao 
abandoned his attack on this place because of his enemy's seizure of Yanzhou; 
and now they are both keeping the peace solely because of the famine. But Cao 
Cao will surely renew the attack in the spring. When Liu Bei refused to allow you to 
vacate office in his favor, you were in full vigor. Now you are ill and weak, and you 
can make this a reason for retirement. He will not refuse again." 


So a message was sent to the little garrison town Xiaopei calling Liu Bei to a 
counsel on military affairs. This brought him with his brothers and a slender escort. 
He was at once called in to the sick man's chamber. Quickly disposing of the 
inquiries about his health, Tao Qian soon came to the real object of his call for Liu 
Bei. 


"Sir, | asked you to come for the sole reason that | am dangerously ill and likely 
to die at any time. | look to you, Illustrious Sir, to consider the Hans and their empire 
as more important than anything else, and so to take over the symbols of office of 
this region, the commission and the seal, that | may close my eyes in peace." 


"You have two sons, why not depute them to relieve you?" said Liu Bei. 


"Both lack the requisite talents. | trust you will instruct them after | have gone, but 
do not let them have the guidance of affairs." 


"But | am unequal to so great a charge." 


"| will recommend to you one who could assist you. He is Sun Qian from Beihai 
who could be appointed to some post." 


Turning to Mi Zhu, Tao Qian said, "The noble Liu Bei here is the most prominent 
man of the time, and you should serve him well." 


Still would Liu Bei have put from him such a post, but just then the Imperial 
Protector, pointing to his heart to indicate his sincerity, passed away. 


When the ceremonial wailing of the officials was over, the insignia of office were 
brought to Liu Bei. But he would have none of them. The following days the 
inhabitants of the town and country around crowded into the state residence, 
bowing and with tears, calling upon Liu Bei to receive the charge. 


"If you do not, we cannot live in pence," said they. 


To these requests his brothers added their persuasion, till at length he 
consented to assume the administrative duties. He forthwith appointed Sun Qian 
and Mi Zhu as his official advisers, and Chen Deng his secretary. He moved his 
army from Xiaopei to Xuzhou City, and he put forth proclamations to reassure the 
people. 


He also attended to the burial ceremonies; he and all his army dressing in 
mourning. After the fullest sacrifices and ceremonies, a burial place for the late 
Imperial Protector was found close to the source of the Yellow River. The dead 
man's testament was forwarded to court. 


The news of the events in Xuzhou duly reached the ears of Cao Cao, then in 
Juancheng. Said he, angrily, "| have missed my revenge. This Liu Bei has simply 
stepped into command of the region without expending half an arrow; he sat still 
and attained his desire. But | will put him to death and then dig up Tao Qian's 
corpse in revenge for the death of my noble father." 


Orders were issued for the army to prepare for a new campaign against Xuzhou. 


But Adviser Xun Yu remonstrated with Cao Cao, saying, "The Supreme Ancestor 
secured the Land Within the Pass and his illustrious successor on the throne, Liu 
Xiu, took Henei. They both first consolidated their position whereby they could 
command the whole empire. Their whole progress was from success to SuCCess. 
Hence they accomplished their great designs in spite of difficulties. 


"Illustrious Sir, your Land Within the Pass and your Henei are Yanzhou and the 
Yellow River, which you had first, and which is of the utmost strategic point of the 
empire. If you undertake this expedition against Xuzhou leaving many troops here 
for defense, you will not accomplish your design; if you leave too few, Lu Bu will fall 
upon us. And finally if you lose this and fail to gain Xuzhou, whither will you retire? 
That region is not vacant. Although Tao Qian has gone, Liu Bei holds it; and since 
the people support him, they will fight to the death for him. To abandon this place 
for that is to exchange the great for the small, to barter the trunk for the branches, to 
leave safety and run into danger. | would implore you to reflect well." 


Cao Cao replied, "It is not a good plan to keep soldiers idle here during such 
scarcity." 


"If that is so, it would be more advantageous to attack the eastern counties of 
Chencheng, Yingchuan, and Runan, and feed your army on their supplies. The 
remnants of the Yellow Scarves, He Yi and Huang Shao, are there with stores and 
treasures of all kinds that they have amassed by plundering wherever they could. 
Rebels of their stamp are easily broken. Break them, and you can feed your army 
with their grain. Moreover, both the court and the common people will join in 
blessing you." 


This new design appealed strongly to Cao Cao, and he quickly began his 
preparations to carry it out. He left Xiahou Dun and Cao Ren to guard Juancheng, 
while his main body, under his own command, marched to seize Chencheng. This 
done they went to Runan and Yingchuan. 


Now when the Yellow Scarves leaders, He Yi and Huang Shao, knew that Cao 
Cao was approaching; they came out in a great body to oppose him. They met at 
Goat Hill. Though the rebels were numerous, they were a poor lot, a mere pack of 
beasts without organization and lacking discipline. Cao Cao ordered his strong 
archers and vigorous crossbowmen to keep them in check. 


Dian Wei was sent out to challenge. The rebel leaders chose a second-rate 
champion for their side, who rode out and was vanquished in the third bout. Then 
Cao Cao's army pushed forward, and they made a camp at Goat Hill. 


The following day the rebel Huang Shao himself led forth his army and made his 
battle array along a circle. A leader advanced on foot to offer combat. He wore a 
yellow turban on his head and a green robe. His weapon was an iron mace. He 
shouted, "| am He Man, the devil who shoots across the sky; who dare fight with 
me?" 


Cao Hong uttered a great shout and jumped from the saddle to accept the 
challenge. Sword in hand he advanced on foot and the two engaged in fierce 
combat in the face of both armies. They exchanged some fifty blows, neither 


gaining the advantage. Then Cao Hong feigned defeat and ran away. He Man 
went after him. Just as he closed, Cao Hong tried a feint and then suddenly 
wheeling about, wounded his adversary. Another slash, and He Man lay dead. 


At once Li Dian dashed forward into the midst of the Yellow Scarves and laid 
hands on the rebel chief Huang Shao whom he carried off captive. Cao Cao's 
troops then set on and scattered the rebels. The spoil of treasure and food was 
immense. 


The other rebel leader, He Yi, fled with a few hundred horsemen toward Kobei 
Hills. But while on their road thither there suddenly appeared a force led by a 
certain swashbuckler who shall be nameless for the moment. This bravo was a 
well-built man, thickset and stout. With a waist ten span in girth. He used a long 
sword. 


He barred the way of retreat. He Yi set his spear and rode toward him. But at the 
first encounter the bravo caught He Yi under his arm and bore He Yi off a prisoner. 
All the rebels were terror-stricken, dropped from their horses and allowed 
themselves to be bound. Then the victor drove them like cattle into an enclosure 
with high banks. 


Presently Dian Wei, still pursuing the rebels, reached Kobei Hills. The 
swashbuckler went out to meet him. 


"Are you also a Yellow Scarf?" said Dian Wei. 

"| have some hundreds of them prisoners in an enclosure here." 
"Why not bring them out?" said Dian Wei. 

"| will if you win this sword from my hand." 


This annoyed Dian Wei who attacked him. They engaged and the combat lasted 
for two long hours and then was still undecided. Both rested a while. The 
swashbuckler was the first to recover and renewed the challenge. They fought till 
dusk and then, as their horses were quite spent, the combat was once more 
suspended. 


In the meantime some of Dian Wei's men had run off to tell the story of this 
wondrous fight to Cao Cao who hastened in amazement, followed by many officers 
to watch it and see the result. 


Next day the unknown warrior rode out again, and Cao Cao saw him. In Cao 
Cao's heart he rejoiced to see such a doughty hero and desired to gain his 
services. So Cao Cao bade Dian Wei feign defeat. 


Dian Wei rode out in answer to the challenge, and some thirty bouts were 
fought. Then Dian Wei turned and fled toward his own side. The bravo followed 
and came quite close. But a flight of arrows drove him away. 


Cao Cao hastily drew off his men for one and a half miles and then secretly sent 
a certain number to dig a pitfall and sent troops armed with hooks to lie in ambush. 


The following day Dian Wei was sent out with one hundred horse. His adversary 
nothing loath came to meet Dian Wei. 


"Why does the defeated leader venture forth again?" cried he laughing. 


The swashbuckler spurred forward to join battle, but Dian Wei, after a faint show 
of fighting, turned his horse and rode away. His adversary intent upon capture, took 
no care, and he and his horse all blundered into the pitfall. The hookmen took him 
captive, bound him, and carried him before Cao Cao. 


As soon as he saw the prisoner, Cao Cao advanced from his tent, sent away the 
soldiers, and with his own hands loosened the leader's bonds. Then he brought out 
clothing and dressed him, bade him be seated and asked who he was and whence 
he came. 


"lam named Xu Chu. | am from Qiao. When the rebellion broke out, | and my 
relations of some hundreds built a stronghold within a rampart for protection. One 
day the robbers came, but | had stones ready for them. | told my relatives to keep 
on bringing them up to me and | threw them, hitting somebody every time | threw. 
This drove off the robbers. Another day they came and we were short of grain. So | 
agreed with them to an exchange of plow oxen against grain. They delivered the 
grain and were driving away the oxen when the beasts took fright and tore off to 
their pens. | seized two of oxen by the tail, one with each hand, and hauled them 
backwards a hundred or so paces. The robbers were so amazed that they thought 
no more about oxen but went their way. So they never troubled us again." 


"| have heard of your mighty exploits," said Cao Cao. "Will you join my army?" 
"That is my strongest desire," said Xu Chu. 


So Xu Chu called up his clan, some hundreds in all, and they formally submitted 
to Cao Cao. Xu Chu received the rank of general and received ample rewards. The 
two rebel leaders, He Yi and Huang Shao, were executed. Runan and Yingchuan 
were now perfectly pacified. 


Cao Cao withdrew his army and went back to Juancheng. Xiahou Dun and Cao 
Ren came out to welcome him, and they told him that spies had reported Yanzhou 
City to be left defenseless. Lu Bu's generals, Xue Lan and Li Feng, had given up all 
its garrison to plundering the surrounding country. They wanted him to go against it 


without loss of time. 


"With our soldiers fresh from victory the city will fall at a tap of the drum," said 
they. 


So Cao Cao marched the army straight to the city. An attack was quite 
unexpected but the two leaders, Xue Lan and Li Feng, hurried out their few soldiers 
to fight. Xu Chu, the latest recruit, said he wished to capture these two and he 
would make of them an introductory gift. 


The task was given him and he rode forth. Li Feng with his halberd advanced to 
meet Xu Chu. The combat was brief as Li Feng fell in the second bout. His 
colleague Xue Lan retired with his troops. But he found the drawbridge had been 
seized by Li Dian, so that he could not get shelter within the city. Xue Lan led his 
men toward Juye. But Lu Qian pursued and killed him with an arrow. His soldiers 
scattered to the four winds. And thus Yanzhou was recaptured. 


Next Cheng Yu proposed an expedition to take Puyang. Cao Cao marched his 
army out in perfect order. The van leaders were Dian Wei and Xu Chu; Xiahou Dun 
and Xiahou Yuan led the left wing; Li Dian and Yue Jin led the right wing; Yu Jin 
and Lu Qian guarded the rear. Cao Cao himself commanded the center. 


When they approached Puyang, Lu Bu wished to go out in person and alone to 
attack, but his adviser Chen Gong protested, saying, "General, you should not go 
out until the arrival of the other officers." 


"Whom do | fear?" said Lu Bu. 

So he threw caution to the winds and went out of the city. He met his foes and he 
began to revile them. The redoubtable Xu Chu went to fight with him, but after 
twenty bouts neither combatant was any the worse. 

"He is not the sort that one man can overcome," said Cao Cao. 

And he sent Dian Wei to attack Lu Bu from another direction. Lu Bu stood the 
double onslaught. Soon after the flank commanders joined in-~-Xiahou Dun and 
Xiahou Yuan attacking the left; Li Dian and Yue Jin surrounding the right. Lu Bu 
had six opponents. These proved really too many for him so he turned his horse 
and rode back to the city. 


But when the members of the Tian family saw him coming back beaten, they 
raised the drawbridge. Lu Bu shouted, "Open the gates! Let me in!" 


But the Tians said, "We have gone over to Cao Cao." 


This was hard to hear and the beaten man abused them roundly before he left. 


Chen Gong got away through the east gate taking with him the general's family. 


Thus Puyang came into Cao Cao's hands, and for their present services the Tian 
family were pardoned their previous fault. However, Liu Ye said, "Lu Bu is a savage 
beast. If let alive, he will be a great danger. Hunt him down!" 


Liu Ye was ordered to keep Puyang. Wherefore Cao Cao determined to follow 
Lu Bu to Dingtao whither he had gone for refuge. 


Lu Bu, Zhang Miao, and Zhang Chao were assembled in the city. Gao Shun and 
other generals were out foraging. Cao Cao army arrived but did not attack for many 
days, and presently he withdrew fifteen miles and made a stockade. It was the time 
of harvest, and he set his soldiers to cut the wheat for food. The spies reported this 
to Lu Bu who came over to see. But when he saw that Cao Cao's stockade lay near 
a thick wood, he feared an ambush and retired. Cao Cao heard that Lu Bu had 
come and gone and guessed the reason. 


"He fears an ambush in the wood," said Cao Cao. "We will set up flags there and 
deceive him. There is a long embankment near the camp but behind it there is no 
water. There we will lay an ambush to fall upon Lu Bu when he comes to burn the 
wood." 


So Cao Cao hid all his soldiers behind the embankment except half a hundred 
drummers, and he got together many peasants to loiter within the stockade as 
though it was not empty. 


Lu Bu rode back and told Chen Gong what he had seen. 
"This Cao Cao is very crafty and full of wiles," said the adviser. "Do not act." 
"| will use fire this time and burn out his ambush," said Lu Bu. 


Next morning Lu Bu rode out, and there he saw flags flying everywhere in the 
wood. He ordered his troops forward to set fire on all sides. But to his surprise no 
one rushed out to make for the stockade. Still he heard the beating of drums and 
doubt filled his mind. Suddenly he saw a party of soldiers move out from the shelter 
of the stockade. He galloped over to see what it meant. 


Then the signal-bombs exploded; out rushed the troops and all their leaders 
dashed forward. Xiahou Dun, Xiahou Yuan, Xu Chu, Dian Wei, Li Dian, and Yue 
Jin all attacked at once. Lu Bu was at a loss and fled into the open country. One of 
his generals, Cheng Lian, was killed by an arrow of Yue Jin. Two thirds of his 
troops were lost, and the beaten remainder went to tell Chen Gong what had come 
to pass. 


"We would better leave," said Chen Gong. "An empty city cannot be held." 


So Chen Gong and Gao Shun, taking their chief's family with them, abandoned 
Dingtao. When Cao Cao's soldiers got into the city, they met with no resistance. 
Zhang Chao committed suicide by burning himself. Zhang Miao fled to Yuan Shu. 


Thus the whole northeast fell under the power of Cao Cao. He immediately 
tranquilized the people and rebuilt the cities and their defenses. 


Lu Bu in his retreat fell in with his generals, and Chen Gong also rejoined him, 
so that he was by no means broken. 


"| have but small army," said Lu Bu, "but still enough to break Cao Cao." 
And so he retook the backward road. Indeed: 


Thus does fortune alternate, victory, defeat, 
The happy conqueror today, tomorrow, must retreat? 


What was the fate of Lu Bu will appear later. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 13: 
Li Jue and Guo Si Duel In Changan; 
The Emperor Establishes Anyi The New Capital. 


The last chapter told of the defeat of Lu Bu, and his gathering the remnant of his 
army at Dingtao. When all his generals had joined him, he began to feel strong 
enough to try conclusions with Cao Cao once again. 


Said Chen Gong, who was opposed to this course, "Cao Cao is too strong right 
now; seek some place where we can rest a time before trying." 


"Suppose | went to Yuan Shao," said Lu Bu. 
"Send first to make inquiries." 


Lu Bu agreed. The news of the fighting between Cao Cao and Lu Bu had 
reached Jizhou, and one of Yuan Shao's advisers, Shen Pei, warned him, saying, 
"Lu Bu is a savage beast. If he gets possession of Yanzhou, he will certainly 
attempt to add this region to it. For your own safety you should help to crush him." 


Wherefore Yuan Shao sent Yan Liang with fifty thousand troops to destroy Lu 
Bu. The spies heard this and at once told Lu Bu, who was greatly disturbed and 
called in Chen Gong. 


"Go over to Liu Bei, who has lately succeeded to Xuzhou." 
Hence Lu Bu went thither. 
Hearing this, Liu Bei said, "Lu Bu is a hero, and we will receive him with honor." 


But Mi Zhu was strongly against receiving him, saying, "He was a cruel, 
bloodthirsty beast." 


But Liu Bei replied, "How would misfortune have been averted from Xuzhou if he 
had not attacked Yanzhou? He cannot be our enemy now that he comes seeking 
an asylum." 


"Brother, your heart is really too good. Although it may be as you say, yet it 
would be well to prepare," said Zhang Fei. 


The new Imperial Protector with a great following met Lu Bu ten miles outside 
the city gates, and the two chiefs rode in side by side. They proceeded to the 
residence and there, after the elaborate ceremonies of reception were over, they 
sat down to converse. 


Said Lu Bu, "After Wang Yun and | plotted to slay Dong Zhuo and my misfortune 
in the Li Jue and Guo Si's sedition, | drifted about from one place to another, and 
none of the nobles east of the Huashang Mountains seemed willing to receive me. 
When Cao Cao with wicked ambition invaded this region and you, Sir, came to its 
rescue, | aided you by attacking Yanzhou and thus diverting a portion of his force. | 
did not think then that | should be the victim of a vile plot and lose my leaders and 
my soldiers. But now if you will, | offer myself to you that we may together 
accomplish great designs." 


Liu Bei replied, "When the late Tao Qian died, there was no one to administer 
Xuzhou, and so | assumed that task for a time. Now since you are here, General, it 


is most suitable that | step down in your favor." 


Whereupon Liu Bei handed the insignia and the seal of authority to Lu Bu. Lu Bu 
was on the point of accepting them, when he saw Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, who 
stood behind the Imperial Protector, glaring at him with angry eyes. 


So Lu Bu put on a smile and said, "| may be something of a fighting man, but | 
could not rule a great region like this." 


Liu Bei repeated his offer. But Chen Gong said, "The strong guest does not 
oppress his host. You need not fear, Lord Liu Bei." 


Then Liu Bei desisted. Banquets were held and dwelling places prepared for the 
guest and his retinue. 


As soon as convenient, Lu Bu returned the feast. Liu Bei went with his two 
brothers. Half through the banquet Lu Bu requested Liu Bei to retire to one of the 
inner private rooms, whither Guan Yu and Zhang Fei followed him. There Lu Bu 
bade his wife and daughter bow as to their benefactor. Here also Liu Bei showed 
excessive modesty. 


Lu Bu said, "Good Younger Brother, you need not be so very modest." 


Zhang Fei heard what Lu Bu said, and his eyes glared, crying, "What sort of a 
man are you that dares call our brother 'younger brother'? He is one of the ruling 
family-~-a jade leaf on a golden branch. Come out, and | will fight you three 
hundred bouts for the insult." 


Liu Bei hastily checked the impulsive one, and Guan Yu persuaded him to go 
away. Then Liu Bei apologized, saying, "My poor brother talks wildly after he has 
been drinking. | hope you will not blame him." 


Lu Bu nodded, but said nothing. Soon after the guests departed. But as the host 
escorted Liu Bei to his carriage, he saw Zhang Fei galloping up armed as for a fray. 


"Lu Bu, you and | will fight that duel of three hundred bouts!" shouted Zhang Fei. 
Liu Bei bade Guan Yu check him. Next day Lu Bu came to take leave of his host. 


"You, O Lord, kindly received me, but | fear your brothers and | cannot agree. So 
| will seek some other asylum." 


"General, if you go, the blame is mine. My rude brother has offended and must 
eventually apologize. In the meantime what think you of a temporary sojourn at the 
town where | was encamped for some time, Xiaopei? The place is small and mean, 
but it is near, and | will see to it that you are supplied with all you need." 


Lu Bu thanked him and accepted this offer. He led his troops there and took up 
residence. After he had gone, Liu Bei buried his annoyance, and Zhang Fei did not 
again refer to the matter. 


That Cao Cao had subdued the east of the Huashang Mountains has been 
stated before. He memorialized the Throne and was rewarded with the title of 
General Who Exhibits Firm Virtue and Lord of Feiting. At this time the rebellious Li 
Jue was commanding the court, and he had made himself Regent Marshal, and his 
colleague Guo Si styled himself Grand Commander. Their conduct was 
abominable but no one dared to criticize them. 


Imperial Guardian Yang Biao and Minister Zhu Jun privately talked with Emperor 
Xian and said, "Cao Cao has two hundred thousand troops and many capable 
advisers and leaders; it would be well for the empire if he would lend his support to 
the imperial family and help to rid the government of this evil party." 


His Majesty wept, "| am weary of the insults and contempt of these wretches and 
should be very glad to have them removed." 


"| have thought of a plan to estrange Li Jue and Guo Si and so make them 
destroy each other. Then Cao Cao could come and cleanse the court," said Yang 
Biao. 


"How will you manage it?" asked the Emperor. 


"Guo Si's wife, Lady Qiong, is very jealous, and we can take advantage of her 
weakness to bring about a quarrel." 


So Yang Biao received instruction to act, with a secret edict to support him. Yang 
Biao's wife, Lady Kai, made an excuse to visit Lady Qiong at her palace and, in the 
course of conversation, said "There is talk of secret liaison between the General, 
your husband, and the wife of Minister Li Jue. It is a great secret, but if Minister Li 
Jue knew it, he might try to harm your husband. | think you ought to have very little 
to do with that family." 


Lady Qiong was surprised but said, "| have wondered why he has been sleeping 
away from home lately, but | did not think there was anything shameful connected 
with it. | should never have known if you had not spoken. | must put a stop to it." 


By and by, when Lady Kai took her leave; Lady Qiong thanked her warmly for 
the information she had given. 


Some days passed, and Guo Si was going over to the dwelling of Li Jue to a 
dinner. Lady Qiong did not wish him to go and she said, "This Li Jue is very deep, 
and one cannot fathom his designs. You two are not of equal rank, and if he made 


away with you, what would become of your poor handmaid?" 


Guo Si paid no attention, and his wife could not prevail on him to stay at home. 
Late in the afternoon some presents arrived from Li Jue's palace, and Lady Qiong 
secretly put poison into the delicacies before she set them before her lord. Guo Si 
was going to taste at once but she said, "It is unwise to consume things that come 
from outside. Let us try on a dog first." 


They did and the dog died. This incident made Guo Si doubt the kindly 
intentions of his colleague. 


One day, at the close of business at court, Li Jue invited Guo Si to his palace. 
After Guo Si arrived home in the evening, rather the worse for too much wine, he 
was seized with a colic. His wife said she suspected poison and hastily 
administered an emetic, which relieved the pain. Guo Si began to feel angry, 
saying, "We did everything together and helped each other always. Now he wants 
to injure me. If | do not get in the first blow, | shall suffer some injury." 


So Guo Si began to prepare his guards for any sudden emergency. This was 
told to Li Jue, and he in turn grew angry, saying, "So Guo Si is doing so and so." 


Then Li Jue got his guards under way and came to attack Guo Si. Both houses 
had ten thousand, and the quarrel became so serious that they fought a pitched 
battle under the city walls. When that was over both sides turned to plunder the 
people. 


Then a nephew of Li Jue, Li Xian, suddenly surrounded the Palace, put the 
Emperor and Empress in two carriages, and assigned Jia Xu and Zuo Ling to carry 
them off. The palace attendants were made to follow on foot. As they went out of the 
rear gate, they met Guo Si's army who began to shoot at the cavalcade with arrows. 
They killed many attendants before Li Jue's army came up and forced them to 
retire. 


The carriages were got out of the Palace and eventually reached Li Jue's camp, 
while Guo Si's soldiers plundered the Palace and carried off all the women left 
there to their camp. Then the Palace was set on fire. 


As soon as Guo Si heard of the whereabouts of the Emperor, he came over to 
attack the camp of Li Jue. The Emperor between these two opposing factions was 
greatly alarmed. Indeed: 


Slowly the Hans had declined but renewed their vigor with Liu Xiu, 
Twelve were the rulers before him, followed him also twelve others. 
Foolish were two of the latest, dangers surrounded the altars, 
These were degenerate days, with authority given to eunuchs. 


Then did He Jin the simple, the inept, who commanded the army, 
Warriors call to the capital, wishing to drive out the vermin; 

Though they drove out the leopards, tigers and wolves quickly entered. 
All kinds of evil were wrought by a low class creature from Xizhou. 
Wang Yun, honest of heart, beguiled this wretch with a woman, 
Much desired of his henchman, thus sowing seeds of dissension. 
Strife resulted, and peace no longer dwelt in the empire. 

No one suspected that Li Jue and Guo Si would continue the evil, 
Much to the sorrow of the Middle Empire; yet they stove for a trifle. 
Famine stalked in the Palace, grief for the clashing of weapons; 
Why did the warriors strive? Why was the land thus partitioned? 
They had turned aside from the way appointed of Heaven. 

Kings must ponder these things; heavy the burden lies on them, 
Chiefest in all the realm theirs is no common appointment, 

Should the King falter or fail, calamities fall on the multitude people, 
The empire is drenched with their blood, grisly ruin surrounds them. 
Steeped in sorrow and sad, read you the ancient records; 

Long is the tale of years; the tale of sorrow is longer. 

Wherefore one who would rule, chiefly must exercise forethought. 
This and a keen-edged blade, these must suffice to maintain one. 


Guo Si's army arrived, and Li Jue went out to give battle. Guo Si's troops had no 
success and retired. Then Li Jue removed the imperial captives to Meiwo with his 
nephew Li Xian as gaoler. Supplies were reduced, and famine showed itself on the 
faces of the eunuchs. The Emperor sent to Li Jue to request five carts of rice and 
five sets of bullock bones for his attendants. 


Li Jue angrily replied, "The court gets food morning and evening; why do they 
ask for more?" 


He sent putrid meat and rotten grain, and the Emperor was very vexed at the 
new insult. Imperial Counselor Yang Qi counseled patience, saying, "Li Jue is a 
base creature but, under the present circumstances, Your Majesty must put up with 
it. You may not provoke him." 


The Emperor bowed and was silent, but the tears fell on his garments. Suddenly 
some one came in with the tidings that a force of cavalry, their sabers glittering in 
the sun, was approaching to rescue them. Then they heard the gongs beat and the 
roll of the drums. 


The Emperor sent to find out who it was. But it was Guo Si, and the sadness fell 
again. Presently arose a great din. For Li Jue had gone out to do battle with Guo Si, 
whom he abused by name. 


"| treated you well and why did you try to kill me?" said Li Jue. 


"You are a rebel, why should | not slay you?" cried Guo Si. 
"You call me rebel when | am guarding the Emperor?" 
"You have abducted him; do you call that guarding?" 


"Why so many words? Let us forgo a battle and settle the matter in single 
combat, the winner to take the Emperor and go." 


The two generals fought in front of their armies, but neither could prevail over the 
other. 


Then they saw Yang Biao come riding up to them, crying, "Rest a while, O 
Commanders! For | have invited a party of officers to arrange a peace." 


Wherefore the two leaders retired to their camps. Soon Yang Biao, Zhu Jun, and 
sixty other officials came up and went to Guo Si's camp. They were all thrown into 
confinement. 


"We came with good intentions," they moaned, "and we are treated like this." 
"Li Jue has run off with the Emperor; | have to have the officers," said Guo Si. 


"What does it mean? One has the Emperor, the other his officers. What do you 
want?" said Yang Biao. 


Guo Si lost patience and drew his sword, but Commander Yang Mi persuaded 
him not to slay the speaker. Then Guo Si released Yang Biao and Zhu Jun but kept 
the others in the camp. 


"Here are we two officers of the Throne, and we cannot help our lord. We have 
been born in vain," said Yang Biao to Zhu Jun. 


Throwing their arms about each other, they wept and fell swooning to the earth. 
Zhu Jun went home, fell seriously ill and died. 


Thereafter the two adversaries fought every day for nearly three months each 
losing many soldiers. 


Now Li Jue was irreligious and practiced magic. He often called witches to beat 
drums and summon spirits, even when in camp. Jia Xu used to remonstrate with 
him, but quite uselessly. 


Yang Qi said to the Emperor, "That Jia Xu, although a friend of Li Jue, never 
seems to have lost the sense of loyalty to Your Majesty." 


Soon after Jia Xu himself arrived. The Emperor sent away his attendants and 
said to Jia Xu, weeping the while, "Can you not pity the Hans and help me?" 


Jia Xu prostrated himself, saying, "That is my dearest wish. But, Sire, say no 
more; let thy servant work out a plan." 


The Emperor dried his tears, and soon Li Jue came in. He wore a sword by his 
side and strode straight up to the Emperor, whose face became the color of clay. 


Then Li Jue spoke, "Guo Si has failed in his duty and imprisoned the court 
officers. He wished to slay Your Majesty, and you would have been captured but for 
me." 


The Emperor joined his hands together in salute and thanked Li Jue. Li Jue 
went away. Before long Huangfu Li entered; and the Emperor, knowing him as a 
man of persuasive tongue and that he came from the same county as Li Jue, bade 
him go to both factions to try to arrange peace. 


Huangfu Li accepted the mission and first went to Guo Si, who said, "I would 
release the officers if Li Jue would restore the Emperor to full liberty." 


Huangfu Li then went to the other side. To Li Jue he said, "Since | am a Xiliang 
man, the Emperor and the officers have selected me to make peace between you 
and your adversary. Guo Si has consented to cease the quarrel; will you agree to 
peace?" 


"| overthrew Lu Bu; | have upheld the government for four years and have many 
great services to my credit as all the world knows. That other fellow, that horse-thief, 
has dared to seize the officers of state and to set himself up against me. | have 
sworn to slay him. Look around you. Do you not think my army large enough to 
break him?" 


"It does not follow," said Huangfu Li. "In ancient days in Yougiong, Hou Yi, proud 
of and confident in his archer's skill, gave no thought to others and governed alone, 
and he so perished. Lately you yourself have seen the powerful Dong Zhuo 
betrayed by Lu Bu, who had received many benefits at his hands. In no time Dong 
Zhuo's head was hanging over the gate. So you see mere force is not enough to 
ensure safety. Now you are a general, with the axes and whips and all the symbols 
of rank and high office; your descendants and all your clan occupy distinguished 
positions. You must confess that the state has rewarded you liberally. True, Guo Si 
has seized the officers of state, but you have done the same to the 'Most Revered. ' 
Who is worse than the other?" 


Li Jue angrily drew his sword and shouted, "Did the Son of Heaven send you to 
mock and shame me?" 


But his commander, Yang Feng, checked him. 


"Guo Si is still alive," said Yang Feng, "and to slay the imperial messenger would 
be giving him a popular excuse to raise an army against you. And all the nobles 
would join him." 


Jia Xu also persuaded Li Jue, and gradually his wrath cooled down. Huangfu Li 
was urged to go away. But Huangfu Li would not be satisfied with failure. As he 
went out of the camp, he cried loudly, "Li Jue will not obey the Emperor's command. 
He will kill his prince to set up himself." 


Counselor Hu Miao tried to shut Huangfu Li's mouth, saying, "Do not utter such 
words. You will only bring hurt upon yourself." 


But Huangfu Li shrieked at him also, saying, "You also are an officer of state, 
and yet you even back up the rebel. When the prince is put to shame, the minister 
dies. That is our code. If it be my lot to suffer death at the hands of Li Jue, so be it!" 


And Huangfu Li maintained a torrent of abuse. The Emperor heard of the 
incident, called in Huangfu Li and sent him away to his own country Xiliang. 


Now more than half Li Jue's troops were from Xiliang, and he had also the 
assistance of the Qiangs, the tribespeople beyond the border. When Huangfu Li 
spread that Li Jue was a rebel and so were those who helped him, and that there 
would be a day of heavy reckoning, those stories disturbed the soldiers. Li Jue sent 
one of his officers, General Wang Chang of the Tiger Army, to arrest Huangfu Li; 
but Wang Chang had a sense of right and esteemed Huangfu Li as an honorable 
man. Instead of carrying out the orders, Wang Chang returned to say he could not 
be found. 


Jia Xu tried to work on the feelings of the barbarian tribes. He said to them, "The 
Son of Heaven knows you are loyal to him and have bravely fought and suffered. 
He has issued a secret command for you to go home, and then he will reward you." 


The tribesmen had a grievance against Li Jue for not paying them, so they 
listened readily to the insidious persuasions of Jia Xu and deserted. 


Then Jia Xu advised the Emperor, "Li Jue is covetous in nature. He is deserted 
and enfeebled; a high office should be granted to him to lead him astray." 


So the Emperor officially appointed Li Jue Regent Marshal. This delighted him 
greatly, and he ascribed his promotion to the potency of his wise witches' prayers 
and incantations. He rewarded those people most liberally. 


But his army was forgotten. Wherefore his commander, Yang Feng, was angry; 


and he said to General Song Guo, "We have taken all the risks and exposed 
ourselves to stones and arrows in his service, yet instead of giving us any reward 
he ascribes all the credit to those witches of his." 


"Let us put him out of the way and rescue the Emperor," said Song Guo. 
"You explode a bomb within as signal and | will attack from outside." 


So the two agreed to act together that very night in the second watch. But they 
had been overheard, and the eavesdropper told Li Jue. Song Guo was seized and 
put to death. That night Yang Feng waited outside for the signal and while waiting, 
out came Li Jue himself. Then a melee began, which lasted till the fourth watch. But 
Yang Feng got away and fled to Xian. 


But from this time Li Jue's army began to fall away, and he felt more than ever 
the losses caused by Guo Si's frequent attacks. Then came news that Zhang Ji, at 
the head of a large army, was coming down from Shanxi to make peace between 
the two factions. Zhang Ji vowed he would attack the one who was recalcitrant. Li 
Jue tried to gain favor by hastening to send to tell Zhang Ji he was ready to make 
peace. So did Guo Si. 


So the strife of the rival factions ended at last, and Zhang Ji memorialized asking 
the Emperor to go to Hongnong near Luoyang. 


The Emperor was delighted, saying, "| have longed to go back to the east." 


Zhang Ji was rewarded with the title of Commander of the Flying Cavalry and 
was highly honored. Zhang Ji saw to it that the Emperor and the court had good 
supplies of necessaries. Guo Si set free all his captive officers, and Li Jue prepared 
transport for the court to move to the east. Li Jue told off companies of his Royal 
Guard to escort the cavalcade. 


The progress had been without incident as far as Xinfeng. Near Baling Bridge 
the west wind of autumn came on to blow with great violence, but soon above the 
howling of the gale was heard the trampling of a large body of force. They stopped 
at a bridge and barred the way. 


"Who comes?" cried a voice. 


"The Imperial Chariot is passing, and who dares stop it?" said Yang Qi, riding 
forward. 


Two leaders of the barring party advanced to Yang Qi, saying, "General Guo Si 
has ordered us to guard the bridge and stop all spies. You say the Emperor is here; 
we must see him, and then we will let you pass." 


So the pearl curtain was raised and the Emperor said, "I, the Emperor, am here. 
Why do you not retire to let me pass, Gentlemen?" 


They all shouted, "Long Life! Long Life!" and fell away to allow the cortege 
through. 


But when they reported what they had done, Guo Si was very angry, saying, "I 
meant to outwit Zhang Ji, seize the Emperor, and hold him in Meiwo. Why have you 
let him get away?" 


He put the two officers to death, set out to pursue the cavalcade, and overtook it 
just at the county of Huaying. The noise of a great shouting arose behind the 
travelers, and a loud voice commanded, "Stop the train!" 


The Emperor burst into tears. 
"Out of the wolf's den into the tiger's mouth!" said he. 


No one knew what to do; they were all too frightened. But when the rebel army 
was just upon them, they heard the beating of drums and from behind some hills 
came into the open a cohort of one thousand soldiers preceded by a great flag 
bearing the name "Han General Yang Feng". 


Having defeated by Li Jue, Yang Feng fled to the foothills of the Xian; and he 
came up to offer his services as soon as he heard the Emperor's journey. Seeing it 
was necessary to fight now, he drew up his line of battle. Guo Si's general, Cui 
Yong, rode out and began a volley of abuse. Yang Feng turned and said, "Where is 
Xu Huang?" 


In response out came a valiant warrior gripping a heavy battle-ax. He galloped 
up on his fleet bay, making directly for Cui Yong, whom he felled at the first blow. At 
this the whole force dashed forward and routed Guo Si. The defeated army went 
back some seven miles, while Yang Feng rode forward to see the Emperor who 
graciously said, "It is a great service you have rendered; you have saved my life." 


Yang Feng bowed and thanked him, and the Emperor asked to see the actual 
slayer of the rebel leader. So Xu Huang was led to the chariot where he bowed and 
was presented as "Xu Huang of Hedong." 


The Emperor recognized the achievement of the warrior. 


Then the cavalcade went forward, Yang Feng acting as escort as far as the city 
of Huaying, the halting place for the night. The Commander of the place, Duan Wei, 
supplied them with clothing and food. And the Emperor passed the night in Yang 
Feng's camp. 


Next day Guo Si, having mustered his troops, appeared in front of the camp, and 
Xu Huang rode out to engage. But Guo Si threw his army out so that they entirely 
surrounded the camp, and the Emperor was in the middle. The position was very 
critical, wnen help appeared in the person of a galloping general from the 
southeast, and the rebels fell away at his assault. Then Xu Huang smote them and 
so scored a victory. 


When they had time to see their helper, they found him to be Dong Cheng, the 
uncle of the Emperor or the "State Uncle." The Emperor wept as he related his 
sorrows and dangers. 


Said Dong Cheng, "Be of good courage, Sire. General Yang Feng and | have 
pledged ourselves to kill both the rebels Li Jue and Guo Si and so purify the world." 


The Emperor bade them travel east as soon as possible, and so they went on 
night and day till they reached their destination Hongnong. 


Guo Si led his defeated army back. Meeting Li Jue, he told Li Jue of the rescue 
of the Emperor and whither they was going. 


"If they reach the Huashang Mountains and get settled in the east, they will send 
out proclamations to the whole country, calling up the nobles to attack us and we 
and our families will be in danger," said Guo Si. 


"Zhang Ji is holding Changan, and we must be careful. There is nothing to 
prevent a joint attack on Hongnong, when we can kill the Emperor and divide the 
empire between us," said Li Jue. 


Guo Si found this a suitable scheme, so their armies came together again in one 
place and united in plundering the countryside. As they proceeded to Hongnong, 
they left destruction behind them. 


Yang Feng and Dong Cheng heard of the rebels' approach when they were yet 
a long way off, so Yang Feng and Dong Cheng turned back and decided to meet 
them at Dongjian. 


Li Jue and Guo Si had previously made their plan. Since the loyal troops were 
few as compared with their own horde, they would overwhelm the loyal troops like 
a flood. So when the day of battle came, they poured out covering the hills and 
filling the plains. Yang Feng and Dong Cheng devoted themselves solely to the 
protection of the Emperor and Empress. The officials, the attendants, the archives 
and records, and all the paraphernalia of the court were left to care for themselves. 
The rebels ravaged Hongnong, but the two protectors got the Emperor safely away 
into Shanbei. 


When the rebel generals showed signs of pursuit, Yang Feng and Dong Cheng 


had to play a double-edged sword. They sent to offer to discuss terms of peace with 
Li Jue and Guo Si; at the same time they sent a secret edict to enlist the help from 
the leaders of the old White Wave rebels-~-Han Xian, Li Yue, and Hu Cai. Li Yue 
was actually a brigand and had inspired rebels throughout the country, but the 
need for help was so desperate. 


These three, being promised pardon for their faults and crimes and a grant of 
official rank, naturally responded to the call, and thus the loyal side was 
strengthened so that Hongnong was recaptured. But meanwhile Li Jue and Guo Si 
laid waste whatever place they reached, slaying the aged and weakly, forcing the 
strong to join their ranks. When going into a fight they forced these people-soldiers 
to the front, and they called them the "Dare-to-Die" soldiers. 


Li Jue and Guo Si's force was overwhelming. When Li Yue, the White Wave 
leader, approached with his army, Guo Si bade his soldiers scatter clothing and 
valuables along the road. The late robbers could not resist the temptation, so a 
scramble began. Then Guo Si's soldiers fell upon the disordered ranks and did 
much damage. Yang Feng and Dong Cheng had to take the Emperor away to the 
north. 


Li Jue and Guo Si pursued. 


Li Yue said, "The danger is grave. | pray Your Majesty mount a horse and go in 
advance." 


The Emperor replied, "| cannot bear to abandon my officers." 


They wept and struggled on as best they could. The White Wave leader Hu Cai 
was killed in one attack. The enemy came very near, and the Emperor left his 
carriage and went on foot. Yang Feng and Dong Cheng escorted him to the bank of 
the Yellow River. Li Yue sought a boat to ferry him to the other side. The weather 
was very cold and the Emperor and Empress cuddled up close to each other 
shivering. They reached the river but the banks were too high, and they could not 
get down into the boat. So Yang Feng proposed to fasten together the horses' 
bridles and lower down the Emperor slung by the waist. However, the Empress' 
brother, Fu De, found some rolls of white silk from dead soldiers; and they rolled up 
the two imperial personages in the silk, and thus they lowered them down near the 
boat. Then Li Yue took up his position in the prow leaning on his sword. Fu De 
carried the Empress on his back into the boat. 


The boat was too small to carry everybody, and those unable to get on board 
clung to the cable, but Li Yue cut them down, and they fell into the water. They 
ferried over the Emperor and then sent back the boat for the others. There was a 
great scramble to get on board, and they had to chop off the fingers and hands of 
those who persisted in clinging to the boat. 


The lamentation rose to the heavens. When they mustered on the farther bank, 
many were missing, only a dozen of the Emperor's suite were left. Yang Feng found 
a bullock cart and transported the Emperor and Empress to Dayang. They had no 
food and at night sought shelter in a poor, tile-roofed house. The cottagers gave 
them some boiled millet but it was too coarse to be swallowed. 


Next day the Emperor conferred titles on those who had protected him. Li Yue 
was made General Who Conquers the North, and Han Xian was appointed 
General Who Conquers the East. 


The flight continued. Soon two officers of rank came up with the cortege, and 
they bowed before His Majesty with many tears. They were Regent Marshal Yang 
Biao and Minister Han Rong. The Emperor and Empress lifted up their voices and 
wept with them. 


Said Han Rong to his colleague, "The rebels have confidence in my words. You 
stay as guard of the Emperor, and | will take my life in my hands and try to bring 
about peace." 


After Han Rong had gone, the Emperor rested for a time in Yang Feng's camp. 
But Yang Biao requested the Emperor to head for Anyi and make the capital there. 
When the train reached the town, they found it containing not a single lofty building, 
and the court lived in grass huts devoid even of doors. They surrounded these with 
a fence of thorns as a protection, and within this the Emperor held counsel with his 
ministers. The soldiers camped round the fence. 


Now Li Yue and his fellow ruffians showed their true colors. They wielded the 
powers of the Emperor as they wished, and officials who offended them were 
beaten or abused even in the presence of the Emperor. They purposely provided 
thick wine and coarse food for the Emperor's consumption. He struggled to swallow 
what they sent. Li Yue and Han Xian joined in recommending to the Throne the 
names of convicts, common soldiers, sorcerers, leeches, and such people who 
thus obtained official ranks. There were more than two hundred of such people. As 
seals could not be engraved, pieces of metal were hammered into some sort of a 
shape. 


Now Han Rong went to see Li Jue and Guo Si. After listening to his vigorous 
persuasions, the two rebel generals agreed to set free the officials and palace 
people. 


A famine occurred that same year and people were reduced to eating grass from 
the roadside. Starving, they wandered hither and thither. But food and clothing 
were sent to the Emperor from the governor of Henei, Zhang Yang, and the 
governor of Hedong, Wang Yi, and the court began to enjoy a little repose. 


Dong Cheng and Yang Feng sent laborers to restore the palaces in Luoyang 


with the intention of moving the court thither. Li Yue was opposed to this. 


Dong Cheng argued, "Luoyang is the original capital as opposed to the paltry 
town of Anyi. Removal would be but reasonable." 


Li Yue wound up by saying, "You may get the court to remove, but | shall remain 
here." 


But when the consent of the Emperor had been given and a start made, Li Yue 
secretly sent to arrange with Li Jue and Guo Si to capture the Emperor. However, 
this plot leaked out and the escort so arranged as to prevent such a thing, and they 
pressed on to the pass at Zhiguan Hills as rapidly as possible. Li Yue heard this, 
and without waiting for his rebel colleagues to join him set out to act alone. 


About the fourth watch, just as the cavalcade was passing Zhiguan Hills, a voice 
was heard shouting, "Stop those carriages! Li Jue and Guo Si are here." 


This frightened the Emperor greatly, and his terror increased when he saw the 


whole mountain side suddenly light up. Indeed: 


The rebel party, erstwhile split in twain, 
To work their wicked will now join three again. 


How the Son of Heaven escaped this peril will be told in the next chapter. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 14: 
Cao Cao Moves The Court To Xuchang; 
Lu Bu Night-Raids Xuzhou. 


The last chapter closed with the arrival of Li Yue who shouted out falsely that the 
army was that of the two arch rebels Li Jue and Guo Si come to capture the 
imperial cavalcade. But Yang Feng recognized the voice of Li Yue and bade Xu 
Huang go out to fight him. Xu Huang went and in the first bout the traitor fell. The 
White Wave rebels scattered, and the travelers got safely through Zhiguan Hills. 
Here the Governor of Henei, Zhang Yang, supplied them plentifully with food and 
other necessaries and escorted the Emperor to Zhidao. For his timely help, the 
Emperor conferred upon Zhang Yang the rank of a Grand Commander. Yang Feng 
moved his army to the northeast of Luoyang and camped at Yewang. 


Capital Luoyang was presently entered. Within the walls all was destruction. The 
palaces and halls had been burned, the streets were overgrown with grass and 
brambles and obstructed by heaps of ruins. The palaces and courts were 
represented by broken roofs and toppling walls. A small "palace" however was 
soon built, and therein the officers of court presented their congratulations, 
standing in the open air among thorn hushes and brambles. The reign style was 
changed from Prosperous Stability to Rebuilt Tranquillity, the first year (AD 196). 


The year was a year of grievous famine. The Luoyang people, even reduced in 
numbers as they were to a few hundreds, had not enough to eat and they prowled 
about stripping the bark off trees and grubbing up the roots of plants to satisfy their 
starving hunger. Officers of the government of all but the highest ranks went out into 
the country to gather fuel. Many people were crushed by the falling walls of burned 
houses. At no time during the decadence of Han did misery press harder than at 
this period. 


A poem written in pity for the sufferings of that time says: 


Mortally wounded, the white serpent poured forth its life blood at Mangdang 
Hills; 

Blood-red pennons of war waved then in every quarter, 

Chieftain with chieftain strove and raided each other's borders, 

Midst the turmoil and strife the Kingship even was threatened. 

Wickedness stalks in a country when the King is a weakling, 

Brigandage always is rife, when a dynasty's failing, 

Had one a heart of iron, wholly devoid of feeling, 

Yet would one surely grieve at the sight of such desolation. 


Regent Marshal Yang Biao memorialized the Throne, saying, "The decree 
issued to me some time ago has never been acted upon. Now Cao Cao is very 
strong in the east of Huashang Mountains, and it would be well to associate him in 
the government that he might support the ruling house." 


The Emperor replied, "There was no need to refer to the matter again. Send a 
messenger when you will." 


So the decree went forth and a messenger bore it into the East of Huashang. 
Now when Cao Cao had heard that the court had returned to Capital Luoyang, he 
called together his advisers to consult. 


Xun Yu laid the matter before Cao Cao and the council thus: "Eight hundred 
years ago, Lord Wen of Yin supported Prince Xiang of the declining Shang 
Dynasty, and all the feudal lords backed Lord Wen. The Founder of the Hans, Liu 
Bang, won the popular favor by wearing mourning for Emperor Yi of Qin. Now 
Emperor Xian has been a fugitive on the dusty roads. To take the lead in offering 
an army to restore him to honor is to have an unrivaled opportunity to win universal 
regard. But you must act quickly or some one will get in before you." 


Cao Cao understood and at once prepared his army to move. Just at this 
moment an imperial messenger was announced with the very command Cao Cao 
wanted, and Cao Cao immediately set out. 


At Luoyang everything was desolate. The walls had fallen, and there were no 
means of rebuilding them, while rumors and reports of the coming of Li Jue and 
Guo Si kept up a state of constant anxiety. 


The frightened Emperor spoke with Yang Feng, saying, "What can be done? 
There is no answer from the East of Huashang, and our enemies are near." 


Then Yang Feng and Han Xian said, "We, your ministers, will fight to the death 
for you." 


But Dong Cheng said, "The fortifications are weak and our military resources 
small, so that we cannot hope for victory, and what does defeat mean? | see 
nothing better to propose than a move into the east of Huashang Mountains." 


The Emperor agreed to this, and the journey began without further preparation. 
There being few horses, the officers of the court had to march afoot. Hardly a 
bowshot outside the gate they saw a thick cloud of dust out of which came all the 
clash and clamor of an advancing army. The Emperor and his Consort were dumb 
with fear. Then appeared a horseman; he was the messenger returning from the 
East of Huashang. 


He rode up to the chariot, made an obeisance, and said, "General Cao Cao, as 
commanded, is coming with all the military force of the East of Huashang; but 
hearing that Li Jue and Guo Si had again approached the capital, he has sent 
Xiahou Dun in advance. With Xiahou Dun are many capable leaders and fifty 
thousand of proved soldiers. They will guard Your Majesty." 


All fear was swept away. Soon after Xiahou Dun and his staff arrived. Xiahou 
Dun, Xu Chu, and Dian Wei were presented to the Emperor who graciously 
addressed them. Then one came to say a large army was approaching from the 
east, and at the Emperor's command Xiahou Dun went to ascertain who these 
were. He soon returned saying they were Cao Cao's infantry. 


In a short time Cao Hong, Li Dian, and Yue Jin came to the imperial chariot and 
their names having been duly communicated. Cao Hong said, "When my brother, 
Cao Cao, heard of the approach of the rebels, he feared that the advance guard he 
had sent might be too weak, so he sent me to march quickly for reinforcement." 


"General Cao Cao is indeed a trusty servant!" said the Emperor. 


Orders were given to advance, Cao Hong leading the escort. By and by scouts 
came to say that the rebels were coming up very quickly. The Emperor bade 
Xiahou Dun divide his force into two parts to oppose them. Xiahou Dun and Cao 
Hong's armies threw out two wings with cavalry in front and foot behind. They 
attacked with vigor and beat off the Li Jue and Guo Si's rebels with severe loss of 
ten thousand. Then Xiahou Dun and Cao Hong begged the Emperor to return to 
Luoyang, and Xiahou Dun guarded the city. 


Next day Cao Cao came with his great army, and having got them duly camped 
he went into the city to audience. He knelt at the foot of the steps, but was called up 
hither to stand beside the Emperor and be thanked. 


Cao Cao replied, "Having been the recipient of great bounty, thy servant owes 
the state much gratitude. The measure of evil of the two rebels is full, | have two 
hundred thousand of good soldiers to oppose them, and those soldiers are fully 
equal to securing the safety of Your Majesty and the Throne. The preservation of 
the state sacrifice is the matter of real moment." 


High honors were conferred on Cao Cao. He was appointed Commander of 
Capital District, Minister of War, and granted Military Insignia. 


The two rebels, Li Jue and Guo Si, wished to attack Cao Cao's army while 
fatigued from its long march. But their adviser, Jia Xu, opposed this, saying, "There 
was no hope of victory. He has both strong soldiers and brave leaders. Submission 
may bring us amnesty." 


Li Jue was angry at the suggestion, crying, "Do you wish to dishearten the 
army?" 


And he drew his sword on Jia Xu. But the other officers interceded and saved 
the adviser. That same night Jia Xu stole out of the camp and, quite alone, took his 
way home to his native village. 


Soon the rebels decided to offer battle. In reply, Cao Cao sent out Xu Chu, Cao 
Ren, and Dian Wei with three hundred horse. These three leaders dashed into the 
rebels army but quickly retired. This maneuver was repeated, and again repeated 
before the real battle array was formed. 


Then Li Xian and Li Bie, nephews of Li Jue, rode out. At once from Cao Cao's 
side dashed out Xu Chu and cut down Li Xian. Li Bie was so startled that he fell out 
of the saddle. He too was slain. The victor Xu Chu rode back to his own side with 
the two heads. When he offered them to the chief, Cao Cao patted him on the back, 
crying, "You are really my Fan Kuai!" 


Next a general move forward was made, Xiahou Dun and Cao Hong leading the 
two wings and Cao Cao in the center. They advanced to the roll of the drum. The 
rebels fell back before them and presently fled. They pursued, Cao Cao himself 
leading, sword in hand. The slaughter went on till night. Ten thousands were killed 
and many more surrendered. Li Jue and Guo Si went west, flying in panic like dogs 
from a falling house. Having no place of refuge they took to the hills and hid among 
the brushwood. 


Cao Cao's army returned and camped again near the capital. Then Yang Feng 
and Han Xian said one to another, "This Cao Cao has done a great service, and he 
will be the man in power. There will be no place for us." 


So they represented to the Emperor that they wished to pursue the rebels, and 
under this excuse withdrew their army and camped at Daliang. 


One day the Emperor sent to summon Cao Cao to audience. The messenger 
was Called in. Cao Cao noticed that the messenger looked remarkably well and 
could not understand it seeing that everyone else looked hungry and famine 
stricken. So Cao Cao said, "You look plump and well, Sir, how do you manage it?" 


"Only this; | have lived meager for thirty years." 
Cao Cao nodded, "What office do you hold?" 


"| am a graduate recommended for filial piety and honesty. | had offices under 
Yuan Shao and Zhang Yang, but came here when the Emperor returned. Now | am 
one of the secretaries. | am a native of Dingtao, and my name is Dong Zhao." 


Cao Cao got up from his place and crossed over, saying, "| have heard of you. 
How happy | am to meet you!" 


Then wine was brought into the tent, and Xun Yu was called in and introduced. 
While they were talking, a man came in to report that a party was moving eastward. 
Cao Cao ordered to find out whose people these were, but Dong Zhao knew at 
once. 


"They are old leaders under the rebels, Yang Feng and the White Wave General 
Han Xian. They are running off because you have come, Illustrious Sir!" 


"Do they mistrust me?" said Cao Cao. 
"They are not worthy of your attention. They are a poor lot." 
"What of this departure of Li Jue and Guo Si?" 


"Tigers without claws, birds without wings-~-they will not escape you very long. 
They are not worth thinking about." 


Cao Cao saw that he and his guest had much in common, so he began to talk of 
affairs of state. 


Said Dong Zhao, "You, Illustrious Sir, with your noble army have swept away 
rebellion and have become the mainstay of the Throne, an achievement worthy of 
the ancient Five Protectors. But the officials will look at it in very different ways and 
not all favorably to you. | think you would not be wise to remain here, and | advise a 
change of capital to Xuchang. However, it must be remembered that the restoration 
of the capital has been published far and wide and the attention of all the people is 
concentrated on Luoyang, hoping for a period of rest and tranquillity. Another move 
will displease many. However, the performance of extraordinary deed may mean 
the acquisition of extraordinary merit. It is for you to decide." 


"Exactly my own inclination!" said Cao Cao, seizing his guest's hand. "But are 
there not dangers? Yang Feng at Daliang and the court officials!" 


"That is easily managed. Write to Yang Feng and set his mind at rest. Then say 
to the high officials plainly that there is no food in the capital here, and so you are 
going to another place where there is, and where there is no danger of scarcity. 
When they hear it they will approve." 


Cao Cao had now decided; and as his guest took leave, Cao Cao seized his 
hands once more, saying, "| shall need your advice in future affairs." 


Dong Zhao thanked and left. Thereafter Cao Cao and his advisers secretly 
discussed the change of capital. 


Now as to that Court Counselor Wang Li, who was an astrologer, said to Liu Ai, 
Chair of the Imperial Office, "| have been studying the stars. Since last spring Venus 
has been nearing the Guard star in the neighborhood of the Measure, and the 
Cowherd (the Great Bear and Vega) crossing the River of Heaven. Mars has been 
retrograding and came into conjunction with Venus in the Gate of Heaven, so that 
Metal (Venus) and Fire (Mars) are mingled. Thence must emerge a new ruler. The 


aura of the Hans is exhausted, and the ancient states of Jin and Wei must 
increase." 


A secret memorial was presented to the Emperor, saying: 


"The Mandate of Heaven has its course and the five elements-~-metal, wood, 
water, fire, and earth-~-are out of proportion. Earth attacking Fire is Wei attacking 
Han, and the successor to the empire of Han is in Wei." 


Cao Cao heard of these sayings and memorials and sent a man to the 
astrologer to say, "Your loyalty is well known, but the ways of Heaven are past 
finding out. The less said the better." 


Then Cao Cao discussed with Xun Yu. The adviser expounded the meaning 
thus: "The virtue of Han was fire; your element is earth. Xuchang is under the 
influence of earth, and so your fortune depends on getting there. Fire can 
overcome earth, as earth can multiply wood. Dong Zhao and Wang Li agree, and 
you have only to hide your time." 


So Cao Cao made up his mind. 


Next day at court he said, "The capital is deserted and cannot be restored nor 
can it be supplied easily with food. Xuchang is a noble city, resourceful and close 
to Luyang, a grain basin. It is everything that a capital should be. | venture to 
request that the court move thither." 


The Emperor dared not oppose and the officials were too overawed to have any 
independent opinion, so they chose a day to set out. Cao Cao commanded the 
escort, and the officials all followed. When they had traveled a few stages they saw 
before them a high mound and from behind this there arose the beating of drums. 
Then Yang Feng and Han Xian came out and barred the way. In front of all stood 
Xu Huang, who shouted, "Cao Cao is stealing away the Emperor!" 


Cao Cao rode out and took a good look at this man. He seemed a fine fellow; 
and in his secret soul Cao Cao greatly admired him, although he was an enemy. 
Then Cao Cao ordered Xu Chu to go and fight Xu Huang. The combat was battle- 
ax against broadsword, and the two men fought more than half a hundred bouts 
without advantage to either side. Cao Cao then beat the gongs and drew off his 
troops. 


In the camp a council was called. Cao Cao said, "The two rebels themselves 
need not be discussed; but Xu Huang is a fine general, and | was unwilling to use 
any great force against him. | want to win him over to our side." 


Then stepped out Man Chong, replying, "Do not let that trouble you; | will have a 
word with him. | shall disguise myself as a soldier this evening and steal over to the 


enemy's camp to talk to him. | shall incline his heart toward you." 


That night Man Chong, duly disguised, got over to the other side and made his 
way to the tent of Xu Huang, who sat there by the light of a candle. Xu Huang was 
still wearing his coat of mail. 


Suddenly Man Chong ran out in front and saluted, saying, "You have been well 
since we parted, old friend?" 


Xu Huang jumped up in surprise, gazed into the face of the speaker a long time 
and presently said, "What! You are Man Chong of Shanyang? What are you doing 
here?" 


"| am an officer in General Cao Cao's army. Seeing my old friend out in front of 
the army today, | wanted to say a word to him. So | took the risk of stealing in this 
evening and here | am." 


Xu Huang invited Man Chong in and they sat down. Then said Man Chong, 
"There are very few as bold as you on the earth; why then do you serve such as 
your present chiefs, Yang Feng and Han Xian? My master is the most prominent 
man in the world-~-a man who delights in wise people and appreciates soldiers as 
every one knows. Your valor today won his entire admiration, and so he took care 
that the attack was not vigorous enough to sacrifice you. Now he has sent me to 
invite you to join him. Will you not leave darkness for light and help him in his 
magnificent task?" 


Xu Huang sat a long time pondering over the offer. Then he said, with a sigh, "I 
know my masters are doomed to failure, but | have followed their fortunes a long 
time and do not like to leave them." 


"But you know the prudent bird selects its tree, and the wise servant chooses his 
master. When one meets a worthy master and lets him go, one is very reckless." 


"lam willing to do what you say," said Xu Huang, rising. 

"Why not put these two to death as an introductory gift?" said Man Chong. 

"It is very wrong for a servant to slay his master. | will not do that." 

"True; you are really a good man." 

Then Xu Huang, taking only a few horsemen of his own men with him, left that 
night and deserted to Cao Cao. Soon some one took the news to Yang Feng, who 


at the head of a thousand strong horsemen, set out to capture the deserter. 


As they drew close, Yang Feng called out, "Betrayer! Stop there!" 


But Yang Feng fell into an ambush. Suddenly the whole mountain side was lit up 
with torches and out sprang Cao Cao's troops, he himself being in command. 


"| have been waiting here a long time; do not run away," cried Cao Cao. 


Yang Feng was completely surprised and tried to draw off, but was quickly 
surrounded. Then Han Xian came to his rescue, and a confused battle began. 
Yang Feng succeeded in escaping, while Cao Cao kept up the attack on the two 
disordered armies. A great number of the rebels gave in, and the leaders found 
they had too few men left to maintain their independence, so they betook 
themselves to Yuan Shu. 


When Cao Cao returned to camp, the newly surrendered general was presented 
and well received. Then again the cavalcade set out for the new capital. In due time 
they reached Xuchang, and they built palaces and halls, an ancestral temple and 
an altar, terraces and public offices. The walls were repaired, storehouses built and 
all put in order. 


Then came the rewards for Cao Cao's adherents and others. Dong Cheng and 
thirteen others were raised to rank of lordship. All good service was rewarded; 
certain others again, who deserved it, were punished, all according to Cao Cao's 
sole decision. He himself was made Prime Minister, Regent Marshal, and Lord of 
Wuping. Xun Yu was made Imperial Counselor and Chair of the Secretariat; Xun 
You, Minister of War; Guo Jia, Minister of Rites and Religion; Liu Ye, Minister of 
Works; Mao Jie, Minister of Agriculture, and together with Ren Jun, they were put 
over the military stores. Cheng Yu was appointed Lord of Dongping; Dong Zhao, 
Magistrate of Luoyang; Man Chong, Magistrate of Xuchang. Xiahou Dun, Xiahou 
Yuan, Cao Ren, Cao Hong, Lu Qian, Li Dian, Yue Jin, Yu Jin, and Xu Huang were 
made Commanders; Xu Chu and Dian Wei, Commanders of Capital District. All 
good service received full recognition. 


Cao Cao was then the one man of the court. All memorials went first to him and 
were then submitted to the Throne. When state matters were in order, Cao Cao 
gave a great banquet in his private quarters to all his advisers, and affairs outside 
the capital were the subject of discussion. 


Then Cao Cao said, "Liu Bei has his army at Xuzhou, and he carries on the 
administration of the region. Lu Bu fled to Liu Bei when defeated, and Liu Bei gave 
Lu Bu Xiaopei to live in. If these two agreed to join forces and attack, my position 
would be most serious. What precautions can be taken?" 


Then rose Xu Chu, saying, "Give me fifty thousand of picked soldiers, and | will 
give the Prime Minister both their heads." 


Xun Yu said, "O Leader, you are brave, but we must consider the present 


circumstance. We cannot start sudden war just as the capital has been changed. 
However, there is a certain ruse known as ‘Rival Tigers and One Prey.' Liu Bei has 
no decree authorizing him to govern the region. You, Sir Prime Minister, can 
procure one for him, and when sending it, and so conferring upon him right in 
addition to his might, you can enclose a private note telling him to get rid of Lu Bu. lf 
he does, then he will have lost a vigorous warrior from his side, and he could be 
dealt with as occasions serve. Should he fail, then Lu Bu will slay him. This is 'Rival 
Tigers and One Prey' ruse; they wrangle and bite each other." 


Cao Cao agreed that this was a good plan, so he memorialized for the formal 
appointment, which he sent to Liu Bei. Liu Bei was created General Who Conquers 
the East, Lord of Yicheng, and Imperial Protector of Xuzhou as well. At the same 
time a private note was enclosed. 


In Xuzhou, when Liu Bei heard of the change of capital, he began to prepare a 
congratulatory address. In the midst of this an imperial messenger was announced 
and was met which all ceremony outside the gate. When the epistle had been 
reverently received, a banquet was prepared for the messenger. 


The messenger said, "This decree was obtained for you by Prime Minister Cao 
Cao." 


Liu Bei thanked him. Then the messenger drew forth his secret letter. After 
reading it, Liu Bei said, "This matter can be easily arranged." 


The banquet over and the messenger conducted to his lodging to seek repose. 
Liu Bei, before going to rest, called in his councilors to consider the letter. 


"There need be no compunction about putting him to death;" said Zhang Fei, "Lu 
Bu is a bad man." 


"But he came to me for protection in his weakness; how can | put him to death? 
That would be immoral," said Liu Bei. 


"If he was a good man; it would be difficult," replied Zhang Fei. 

Liu Bei would not consent. Next day, when Lu Bu came to offer congratulations, 
he was received as usual. He said, "| have come to felicitate you on the receipt of 
the imperial bounty." 

Liu Bei thanked him in due form. But then he saw Zhang Fei draw his sword and 
come up the hall as if to slay Lu Bu. Liu Bei hastily interfered and stopped Zhang 
Fei. 


Lu Bu was surprised and said, "Why do you wish to slay me, Zhang Fei?" 


"Cao Cao says you are immoral and tells my brother to kill you," shouted Zhang 
Fei. 


Liu Bei shouted again and again to Zhang Fei to go away, and he led Lu Bu into 
the private apartments out of the way. Then he told Lu Bu the whole story and 
showed him the secret letter. 


Lu Bu wept as he finished reading, "This is that miscreant's scheme for sowing 
discord between us." 


"Be not anxious, Elder Brother," said Liu Bei. "| pledge myself not to be guilty of 
such an infamous crime." 


Lu Bu again and again expressed his gratitude, and Liu Bei kept him for a time. 
They remained talking and drinking wine till late. 


Said Guan Yu and Zhang Fei later, "Why not kill him?" 


Liu Bei said, "Because Cao Cao fears that Lu Bu and | may attack him, he is 
trying to separate us and get us to swallow each other, while he steps in and takes 
the advantage. Is there any other reason?" 


Guan Yu nodded assent, but Zhang Fei said, "| want to get him out of the way 
lest he trouble us later." 


"That is not what a noble man should do," said his elder brother. 


Soon the messenger was dismissed and returned to the capital with a the reply 
from Liu Bei. The letter only said the instruction would take time to plan and 
implement. But the messenger, when he saw Cao Cao, told him the story of Liu 
Bei's pledge to Lu Bu. 


Then said Cao Cao, "The plan has failed; what next?" 


Xun Yu replied, "| have another trick called ‘Tiger against Wolf' in which the tiger 
is made to gobble up the wolf." 


"Let us hear it," said Cao Cao. 


"Send to Yuan Shu to say that Liu Bei has sent up a secret memorial to the 
Throne that he wishes to subdue the southern regions around the Huai River. Yuan 
Shu will be angry and attack him. Then you will order Liu Bei to dispose of Yuan 
Shu and so set them destroying each other. Lu Bu will certainly think that is his 
chance and turn traitor. This is the 'Tiger against Wolf" trick." 


Cao Cao thought this good and sent the messenger and also sent a false edict 


to Liu Bei. When this came the messenger was received with all the ceremonies 
and the edict ordered the capture of Yuan Shu. After the departure of the bearer, 
Liu Bei called Mi Zhu who pronounced it a ruse. 

"It may be," said Liu Bei, "but the royal command is not to be disobeyed." 

So the army was prepared and the day fixed. 

Sun Qian said, "A trusty man must be left on guard of the city." 

And Liu Bei asked which of his brothers would undertake this task. 

"| will guard the city," said Guan Yu. 

"| am constantly in need of your advice, so how can we part?" said Liu Bei. 

"| will guard the city," said Zhang Fei. 

"You will fail," said Liu Bei. "After one of your drinking bouts you will get savage 
and flog the soldiers. Beside you are rash and will not listen to any one's advice. | 


shall be uneasy all the time." 


"Henceforth | drink no more wine. | will not beat the soldiers and | will always 
listen to advice," said Zhang Fei. 


"| fear the mouth does not correspond to the heart," said Mi Zhu. 


"| have followed my elder brother these many years and never broken faith; why 
should you be contemptuous?" said Zhang Fei. 


Liu Bei said, "Though you say this, | do not feel quite satisfied. | will order 
Adviser Chen Deng to help you and keep you sober. Then you will not make any 
mistake." 


Chen Deng was willing to undertake this duty, and the final orders were given. 
The army of thirty thousand, horse and foot, left Xuzhou and marched toward 
Nanyang. 


When Yuan Shu heard that a memorial had been presented proposing to take 
possession of his territories, he broke out into abuse of Liu Bei. 


"You weaver of mats! You plaiter of straw shoes! You have been smart enough 
to get possession of a large region and elbow your way into the ranks of the 
nobles. | was just going to attack you, and now you dare to scheme against me! 
How | detest you!" 


So Yuan Shu at once gave orders to prepare an army of one hundred thousand, 
under Ji Ling, to attack Xuzhou. The two armies met at Xuyi, where Liu Bei was 
encamped in a plain with hills behind and a stream on his flank, for his army was 
small. 


Ji Ling was a native of the East of Huashang. He used a very heavy three-edged 
sword. After he had made his camp, he rode out and began abusing his 
opponents, shouting, "Liu Bei, you rustic bumpkin, how dare you invade this land?" 


"| have a decree ordering me to destroy the Governor who behaves improperly. 
If you oppose, you will be assuredly punished," replied Liu Bei. 


Ji Ling angrily rode out brandishing his weapon. 
But Guan Yu cried, "Fool, do not attempt to fight!" 


And Guan Yu rode out to meet him. Then they two fought and after thirty bouts 
neither had an advantage. Then Ji Ling cried out for a rest. So Guan Yu turned his 
horse away, rode back to his own array and waited for Ji Ling. 


When the moment came to renew the combat, Ji Ling sent out one of his officers, 
Xun Zheng, to take his place. But Guan Yu said, "Tell Ji Ling to come; | must settle 
with him who shall be tiger and who shall be deer." 


"You, a reputationless leader and unworthy to fight with our general," replied 
Xun Zheng. 


This reply angered Guan Yu, who made just one attack on Xun Zheng and 
brought him to the ground. At this success Liu Bei urged on the army, and Ji Ling's 
troops were defeated. They retired to the mouth of the River Huaiyin and declined 
all challenges. 


However, many of their troops were sent into Liu Bei's camp for harassment, and 
many of them were slain. The two armies thus stood facing each other. 


In Xuzhou, after Liu Bei had started on his expedition, Zhang Fei placed his 
colleague and helper, Chen Deng, in charge of the administration of the region, 
keeping military affairs under his own supervision. After thinking over the matter or 
some time, he gave a banquet to all the military officers; and when they were all 
seated, he made a speech: "Before my brother left, he bade me keep clear of the 
wine cup for fear of accidents. Now, gentlemen, you may drink deep today; but from 
tomorrow wine is forbidden, for we must keep the city safe. So take your fill." 


And with this he and all his guests rose to drink together. The wine bearer came 
to Cao Bao who declined it, saying, "| never drink as | am forbidden of heaven." 


"What! A fighting man does not drink wine!" said the host. "I want you to take just 
one cup." 


Cao Bao was afraid to offend, so he drank. 


Now Zhang Fei drank huge goblets with all his guests on every hand and so 
swallowed a huge quantity of liquor. He became quite intoxicated. Yet he would 
drink more and insisted on a cup with every guest. It came to the turn of Cao Bao 
who declined. 


"Really, | cannot drink," said Cao Bao. 

"You drank just now; why refuse this time?" 

Zhang Fei pressed him, but still Cao Bao resisted. Then Zhang Fei in his 
drunken madness lost control of his temper and said, "If you disobey the orders of 


your general, you shall be beaten one hundred strokes." 


And he called in his guards. Here Chen Deng interfered reminding him of the 
strict injunctions of his brother. 


"You civilians attend to your civil business and leave us alone," said Zhang Fei. 


The only way of escape for the guest was to beg remission; and Cao Bao did so, 
"Sir, if you Saw my son-in-law's face, you would pardon me." 


"Who is your son-in-law?" 
"Lu Bu." 


"| did not mean to have you really beaten; but if you think to frighten me with Lu 
Bu, | will. | will beat you as if | was beating him," said Zhang Fei. 


The guests interposed to beg him off, but their drunken host was obdurate, and 
the unhappy guest received fifty blows. Then at the earnest prayers of the others 
the remainder of the punishment was remitted. 


The banquet came to an end, and the beaten Cao Bao went away burning with 
resentment. That night he sent a letter to Xiaopei relating the insults he had 
received from Zhang Fei. The letter told Lu Bu of Liu Bei's absence and proposed 
that a sudden raid should be made that very night before Zhang Fei had recovered 
from his drunken fit. Lu Bu at once summoned Chen Gong and told him. 


"Xiaopei is only a place to occupy temporarily," said Chen Gong. "If you can 
seize Xuzhou, do so. It is a good chance." 


Lu Bu got ready at once and soon on the way with five hundred cavalrymen, 
ordering Chen Gong and Gao Shun to follow him with the main body. 


Xiaopei being only about fifteen miles away, Lu Bu was under the walls at the 
fourth watch. It was clear moonlight. No one on the ramparts saw him. Lu Bu came 
up close to the wall and called out, "Liu Bei's secret messenger has arrived." 


The guards on the wall were Cao Bao's people, and they called him. Cao Bao 
came, and when he saw who was there he ordered the gates to be opened. Lu Bu 
gave the secret signal, and the soldiers entered shouting. 


Zhang Fei was in his apartment sleeping off the fumes of wine. His servants 
hastened to arouse him and told him an enemy had got the gates open. 


They said, "Lu Bu got in, and there is fighting in the city." 


Zhang Fei savagely got into his armor and laid hold of his mighty octane-serpent 
halberd. But as he was mounting his horse at the gate the attacking soldiers came 
up. He rushed at them but being still half intoxicated made but a poor fight. Lu Bu 
knowing Zhang Fei's prowess did not press him hard, and Zhang Fei made his 
way, with eighteen leading Guards of Yan, to the east gate, and there went out, 
leaving Liu Bei's family to their fate. 


Cao Bao, seeing Zhang Fei had but a very small force and was still half drunk as 
well, came in pursuit. Zhang Fei saw who it was and was mad with rage. He 
galloped toward Cao Bao and drove him off after a few passes. He followed Cao 
Bao to the moat and wounded him in the back. Cao Bao's frightened steed carried 
its master into the moat, and he was drowned. 


Once well outside the city Zhang Fei collected his troops, and they rode off 
toward the south direction. 


Lu Bu having surprised the city set himself to restore order. He put a guard over 
the residence of Liu Bei so that no one should disturb the family. 


Zhang Fei with his few followers went to his brother's camp and told his story of 
treachery and surprise. All were greatly distressed. 


"Success is not worth rejoicing over; failure is not worth grieving over," said Liu 
Bei with a sigh. 


"Where are our sisters?" asked Guan Yu. 
"They shared the fate of the city." 


Liu Bei nodded his head and was silent. 


Guan Yu with an effort controlled his reproaches and said, "What did you say 
when you promised to guard the city and what orders did our brother give you? 
Now the city is lost and therewith our sisters-in-law. Have you done well?" 


Zhang Fei was overwhelmed by remorse. He drew his sword to kill himself. 


He raised the cup in pledge, 
None might say nay; 

Remorseful, drew the sword, 
Himself to slay. 


Zhang Fei's fate will be told in the next chapter. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 15: 
Taishi Ci Fights With The Little Prince; 
Sun Ce Cuts Short The White Tiger King. 


In the last chapter it was recorded that Zhang Fei was about to end his life with his 
own weapon in Xuyi. But Liu Bei rushed forward and caught Zhang Fei in his arms, 
snatched away the sword, and threw it on the earth, saying, "Brothers are as hands 
and feet; wives and children are as clothing. You may mend your torn dress, but 
who can reattach a lost limb? We three, by the Oath of the Peach Garden, swore to 
seek the same death day. The city is lost, it is true, and my wives and little ones, but 
| could not bear that we should die ere our course be run. Beside, Xuzhou was not 
really ours, and Lu Bu will not harm my family but will rather seek to preserve them. 
You made a mistake, Worthy Brother, but is it one deserving of death?" 


And Liu Bei wept. His brothers were much affected and their tears fell in 


sympathy. As soon as the news of Lu Bu's successful seizure of his protector's 
region reached Yuan Shu, Yuan Shu sent promises of valuable presents to Lu Bu 
to induce him to join in a further attack on Liu Bei. The presents are said to have 
been fifty thousand carts of grain, five hundred horses, ten thousand ounces of gold 
and silver, and a thousand rolls of colored silk. Lu Bu swallowed the bait and 
ordered Gao Shun to lead forth fifty thousand troops. But Liu Bei heard of the 
threatened attack, so he made inclement weather an excuse to moved his few 
soldiers out of Xuyi for Guangling, before the attacking force came up. 


However, Gao Shun demanded the promised reward through Ji Ling, who put 
Gao Shun off, saying, "My lord has gone away; | will settle this as soon as | can see 
him and get his decision." 


With this answer Gao Shun returned to Lu Bu, who could not decide what to do. 
Then came a letter from Yuan Shu, saying, "Although Gao Shun had gone to attack 
Liu Bei, yet Liu Bei had not been destroyed and no reward could be given till he 
was actually taken." 


Lu Bu railed at what he called the breach of faith and was inclined to attack 
Yuan Shu himself. 


However, his adviser, Chen Gong, opposed this course, saying, "You should 
not; Yuan Shu is in possession of Shouchun and has a large army, well supplied. 
You are no match for him. Rather ask Liu Bei to take up his quarters at Xiaopei as 
one of your wings and, when the time comes, let him lead the attack, both south 
and north. Then Yuan Shu and Yuan Shao will fall before you, and you will be very 
powerful." 


Finding this advice good, Lu Bu sent letters to Liu Bei asking him to return. 

After the flight of Liu Bei, Yuan Shu attacked Guangling and reduced Liu Bei's 
force by half. When the messenger from Lu Bu came, Liu Bei read the letter. He 
was quite content with the offer, but his brothers were not inclined to trust Lu Bu. 

"Such a dishonorable man must have a motive," said Guan Yu and Zhang Fei. 

"Since he treats me kindly, | cannot but trust him," replied Liu Bei. 

So Liu Bei went back to Xuzhou. Lu Bu, fearing that Liu Bei might doubt his 
sincerity, restored Liu Bei's family; and when Lady Gan and Lady Mi saw their lord, 
they told him that they had been kindly treated and guarded by soldiers against any 
intrusion, and provisions had never been wanting. 


"| Knew he would not harm my family," said Liu Bei to Guan Yu and Zhang Fei. 


However, Zhang Fei was not pleased and would not accompany his brothers 


into the city when they went to express their thanks. He went to escort the two 
ladies to Xiaopei. 


At the interview Lu Bu said, "I did not wish to take the city, but your brother 
behaved very badly, drinking and flogging the soldiers, and | came to guard it lest 
some evil should befall." 


"But | had long wished to yield it to you," said Liu Bei. 


Thereupon Lu Bu wished to retire in favor of Liu Bei who, however, would not 
hear of it. Liu Bei returned and took up his quarters in Xiaopei, but his two brothers 
would not take the situation kindly and were very discontented. 


Said Liu Bei, "One must bow to one's lot. It is the will of Heaven, and one cannot 
struggle against fate." 


Lu Bu sent presents of food and stuffs, and peace reigned between the two 
houses. 


In Shouchun, Yuan Shu prepared a great banquet for his soldiers when it was 
announced that Sun Ce had subdued Lu Kang, the Governor of Lujiang. Yuan Shu 
summoned the victor, who made obeisance at the foot of the hall of audience. Yuan 
Shu, sitting in state, asked for details of the campaign and then invited Sun Ce to 
the banquet. 


After the unhappy death of his father Sun Jian, Sun Ce had returned to the lower 
region of the Great River, where he had devoted himself to peaceful ends, inviting 
to his side good people and able scholars. Afterwards, when a quarrel broke out 
between his mother's brother, Governor Wu Jing of Dangyang, and the late 
Imperial Protector of Xuzhou, Tao Qian, Sun Ce removed his mother with all the 
family to Que, he himself taking service under Yuan Shu, who admired and loved 
him greatly. 


"If |had a son like Sun Ce," said Yuan Shu, "| should die without regret." 

Yuan Shu appointed Sun Ce Commander and sent him on various expeditions, 
all of which were successful. After this banquet to celebrate the victory over Lu 
Kang, Sun Ce returned to his camp very bitter over the arrogant and patronizing 
airs of his patron. Instead of retiring to his tent Sun Ce walked up and down by the 
light of the moon. 

"Here am |, a mere nobody and yet my father was such a hero!" 


And he cried out and wept in spite of himself. 


Then suddenly appeared one who said, laughing loudly, "What is this, Sun Ce? 


While your noble father enjoyed the light of the sun, he made free use of me; and if 
his son has any difficulty to resolve, why does he not refer it to me also instead of 
weeping here alone?" 


Looking at the speaker Sun Ce saw it was Zhu Zhi, a native of Dangyang, who 
had been in Sun Jian's service. Sun Ce then ceased weeping, and they two sat 
down. 


"| was weeping from regret at being unable to continue my father's work," said 
Sun Ce. 


"Why stay here bound to the service of a master? The Governor of Dangyang is 
in distress. Why not get command of an army under the pretense of an expedition 
to relieve Wu Jing? Escape the shadow of Yuan Shu and take control of Dangyang, 
then you can accomplish great things." 


While these two were talking, another man suddenly entered, saying, "| know 
what you two are planning, Noble Sirs. Under my hand is a band of one hundred 
bold fellows ready to help Sun Ce in whatever he wishes to do." 


The speaker was one of Yuan Shu's advisers named Lu Fan, from Runan. They 
three then sat and discussed schemes. 


"The one fear is that Yuan Shu will refuse to give you the troops," said Lu Fan. 


"| still have the Imperial Hereditary Seal that my father left me; that should be 
good security." 


"Yuan Shu earnestly desires that jewel," said Zhu Zhi. "He will certainly lend you 
troops on that pledge." 


The three talked over their plans, gradually settling the details; and not many 
days after Sun Ce obtained an interview with his patron. 


Assuming the appearance of deep grief Sun Ce said, "| have been unable to 
avenge my father. Now the Imperial Protector of Yangzhou, Liu Yao, is opposing 
my mother's brother, and my mother and her family are in danger in Que. 
Wherefore | would borrow a few thousands of fighting men to rescue them. As 
perhaps, Illustrious Sir, you may lack confidence in me, | am willing to deposit the 
Imperial Hereditary Seal, left me by my late father, as a pledge." 


"Let me see it if you have it," said Yuan Shu. "| do not want the jewel really, but 
you may as well leave it with me. | will lend you three thousand troops and five 
hundred horses. Return as soon as peace can be made. As your rank is hardly 
sufficient for such powers, | will memorialize to obtain for you higher rank with the 
title of General Who Exterminates Brigands, and you can soon start." 


Sun Ce thanked his patron most humbly and soon put the army in motion, taking 
with him his two new advisers and his father's generals-~-Zhu Zhi, Lu Fan, Cheng 
Pu, Huang Gai, Han Dang, and others. 


When Sun Ce reached Linyang, he saw a body of troops in front of him, at their 
head a dashing leader of handsome and refined mien. As soon as this commander 
saw Sun Ce, he dismounted and made obeisance. It was Zhou Yu from Shucheng. 


When Sun Jian was opposing the tyrant Dong Zhuo, he moved his family to 
Shucheng where the Zhou family had lived. And as Zhou Yu and Sun Ce were of 
the same age all but two months, they became exceedingly good friends and 
sworn brothers, Sun Ce being the elder in virtue of his two months' seniority. Zhou 
Yu was on his way to visit Sun Ce's uncle, Governor Wu Jing of Dangyang, when 
the happy meeting took place. 


Naturally Sun Ce confided his projects and inmost ideas to his friend, who at 
once said, "I shall put my whole life and energy to serve you to reach that grand 
goal." 


"Now that you have come, the design is as good as accomplished," said Sun Ce. 
Zhou Yu was introduced to Zhu Zhi and Lu Fan. 


Zhou Yu said, "Do you know of the two Zhangs of Guangling? They would be 
most useful people in working out your schemes." 


"Who are they, the two Zhangs?" said Sun Ce. 


"They are men of transcendent genius who are living near here for the sake of 
tranquillity in these turbulent times. Their names are Zhang Zhao and Zhang Hong. 
Why not invite them to help you, Brother?" 


Sun Ce lost no time in sending letters and gifts, but they both declined. Then he 
visited them in person, was greatly pleased with their speech and by dint of large 
gifts and much persuasion, got them to promise to join him. Sun Ce appointed them 
both Counselors and Generals. 


The plan of the attack upon Yangzhou was the next matter for discussion. The 
Imperial Protector, Liu Yao, was of Donglai, a scion of the imperial family and 
brother of the Imperial Protector of Yanzhou, Liu Dai. Liu Yao had long ruled in 
Yangzhou and headquartered in Shouchun. But Yuan Shu had forced him to flee to 
the southeast of the Great River. He retired to Que and now was battling with Wu 
Jing in Linyang. 


Hearing of the meditated attack on him, Liu Yao summoned his generals to take 


counsel. 


Said General Zhang Ying, "I will take an army and entrench at Niuzhu. No army 
can get past that, whatever its strength." 


Zhang Ying was interrupted by another who shouted, "And let me lead the van!" 


All eyes turned to this man; it was Taishi Ci who, after helping Kong Rong raise 
the siege of Beihai, had come to serve Liu Yao. 


Hearing him offer to undertake the hazardous post of van leader, Liu Yao said, 
"But you are still young and not yet equal to such a charge. Rather stay by my side 
and await my orders." 


Taishi Ci withdrew in disappointment. Soon Zhang Ying led his army to Niuzhu, 
where the stores of grain located. When Sun Ce approached, Zhang Ying went to 
meet him, and the two armies faced each other above the Bullock Rapid. Zhang 
Ying roundly abused his opponent, and Huang Gai rode out to attack him. But 
before the combat had proceeded far, there arose an alarm of fire in Zhang Ying's 
camp. Zhang Ying turned back, and then Sun Ce advanced in full force, compelling 
the enemy to abandon their possession. The defeated general fled to the hills. 


Now the incendiaries who had brought about this result were two, named Jiang 
Qin from Shouchun and Zhou Tai from Jiujiang, who in these turbulent times had 
got together a band of kindred spirits and lived by plundering the country along the 
Great River. They knew Sun Ce by reputation as a man who treated able people 
very liberally and wished to join him. So they came with their band, three hundred 
strong, and helped him in this way as an introduction. Sun Ce welcomed them and 
gave the leaders rank. After taking possession of the stores of all kinds abandoned 
by the runaways, and enlisting four thousand of those who surrendered into his 
own ranks, Sun Ce moved forward to attack Shenting. 


After his defeat Zhang Ying returned to his master and told his misfortune. Liu 
Yao was going to punish his failure by death, but listened to his advisers, who 
asked for mercy for the unfortunate man, and sent him to command the garrison in 
Lingling. Liu Yao himself set out to meet the invaders. He camped south of the 
Sacred Hills. Sun Ce camped on the opposite side of the hills. 


Sun Ce inquired the natives, "Is there a temple of Liu Xiu the Founder of Latter 
Hans in the vicinity?" 


They said, "There is a temple to the south on the summit of the hills." 


"| dreamed last night that Liu Xiu called me, so | will go and pray there," said Sun 
Ce. 


But Counselor Zhang Zhao advised, "My lord, you should not go as the enemy is 
on the other side, and you may fall into an ambush." 


"The spirit will help me; what need | fear?" 

So Sun Ce put on his armor, took his spear and mounted, taking with him twelve 
of his commanders as an escort. They rode up the hills, dismounted, burned 
incense, and they all bowed in the shrine. 

Then Sun Ce knelt and made a vow, saying, "If 1, Sun Ce, succeed in my task 
and restore the authority of my late father, then will | restore this temple and order 
sacrifices at the four seasons." 


When they had remounted, Sun Ce said, "| am going to ride along the ridge and 
reconnoiter the enemy's position." 


His commanders begged him to refrain, but he was obstinate, and they rode 
there together, noting the villages below. 


A soldier of the other side going along a bye road quickly reported the presence 
of horsemen on the ridge, and Liu Yao said, "It is certainly Sun Ce trying to inveigle 
us to battle. But do not go out." 


Taishi Ci jumped up, saying, "What better chance to capture him?" 


So, without orders he armed himself and rode through the camp, crying, "If there 
be any valiant people among you, follow me!" 


No one moved save a subaltern who said, "He is a valiant man and | will go with 
him." 


So he also went. The others only laughed at the pair. 

Now having seen all he wished, Sun Ce thought it time to return and wheeled 
round his horse. But when he was going over the summit, some one shouted, 
"Stay, Sun Ce!" 

Sun Ce turned; two horsemen were coming at full speed down the next hill. Sun 
Ce halted and drew up his little escort right and left, he himself with his spear 
ready. 

"Which is Sun Ce?" shouted Taishi Ci. 


"Who are you?" was the reply. 


"|, Taishi Ci of Laihuang, come to take him prisoner." 


"Then | am he," said Sun Ce, laughing. "Come both of you together; | am not 
afraid of you. If | were, | should not be Sun Ce." 


"You and all your crowd come on and | will not blench," cried Taishi Ci putting 
his horse at a gallop and setting his spear. 


Sun Ce braced himself for the shock and the battle began. Fifty bouts were 
fought and still neither combatant had the advantage. Sun Ce's commanders 
whispered to each other their admiration and amazement. Taishi Ci saw that the 
spearmanship of his opponent showed no weak point whereby he could gain the 
advantage, so he decided to resort to guile. Feigning defeat he would lead Sun Ce 
to pursue. Taishi Ci however did not retire along the road by which he had come, 
but took a path leading around the hill instead of over it. His antagonist followed, 
shouting, "He who retreats is no worthy soldier!" 


But Taishi Ci thought within himself, "He has twelve others at his back and | only 
one. If | capture him, the others will retake him. | will inveigle him into some secret 
spot and then try." 


So flying and fighting by turns he led Sun Ce, an eager pursuer, down to the 
plain. Here Taishi Ci suddenly wheeled about and attacked. Again they exchanged 
half a hundred bouts, without result. Then Sun Ce made a fierce thrust, which his 
opponent evaded by gripping the spear under his arm, while he himself did the 
same with his opponent's spear. Neither was wounded but each exerting his 
utmost strength to pull the other out of the saddle they both came to the ground. 


Their steeds galloped off they knew not whither, while the two men, each 
dropping his spear, began a hand to hand struggle. Soon their fighting robes were 
in tatters. Sun Ce gripped the short lance that Taishi Ci carried at his back, while 
Taishi Ci tore off the Sun Ce's helmet. Sun Ce tried to stab with the short lance but 
Taishi Ci fended off the blow with the helmet as a shield. 


Then arose a great shouting. Liu Yao had come up with a thousand soldiers. 
Sun Ce seemed now in sore straits. His twelve followers came up, and each 
combatant let go his hold. Taishi Ci quickly found another steed, seized a spear, 
and mounted. Sun Ce, whose horse had been caught by Cheng Pu, also mounted, 
and a confused battle began between the handful of men on one side and a whole 
thousand troops on the other. It swayed and drifted down the hill side. However, 
soon Zhou Yu leading his troops came to the rescue, and as evening drew on a 
tempest put an end to the fight. Both sides drew off and returned to camp. 


Next day Sun Ce led his army to the front of Liu Yao's camp, and the challenge 
was accepted. The armies were drawn up. Sun Ce hung the short lance he had 
seized from Taishi Ci at the end of his spear and waved it in front of the line of 
battle and ordered his soldiers to shout, "If the owner of this had not fled, he would 


have been stabbed to death." 


On the other side they hung out Sun Ce's helmet, and the soldiers shouted back, 
"Sun Ce's head is here already." 


Both sides thus yelled defiance at each other, one side boasting, the other 
bragging. Then Taishi Ci rode out challenging Sun Ce to a duel to the death, and 
Sun Ce would have accepted, but Cheng Pu said, "My lord should not trouble 
himself; | will take him." 


And Cheng Pu rode forth. 
"You are no antagonist for me," said Taishi Ci. "Tell your master to come out." 


This incensed Cheng Pu, who rode at his opponent, and they two fought thirty 
bouts. The duel was stopped by the gongs of Liu Yao. 


"Why did you sound the retreat?" said Taishi Ci. "| was just going to capture the 
wretch." 


"Because | have just heard that Que has been captured. Zhou Yu led a surprise 
force thither, and Chen Wu was in league with him to betray the city. We have no 
home now. | will hasten to Moling to get the help of Xue Li and Ze Rong to retake 
the city." 


The army retired, Taishi Ci with it, without being pursued. On the other side 
Zhang Zhao said to Sun Ce, "Zhou Yu's attack is the cause of this move; they are in 
no mood to fight. A night raid on their camp would finish them." 


The army was divided into five divisions for the night surprise and hastened 
toward the camp where they scored a victory. Their opponents scattered in all 
directions. Taishi Ci alone made a determined stand, and as he could not 
withstand a whole army, he fled with ten horsemen to Jingxian. 


Now Sun Ce acquired a new adherent in the person of Chen Wu. He was a 
soldier of middle height, sallow of complexion and dark eye, an odd looking man. 
But Sun Ce held him in high esteem, appointed him Commander, and put him in 
the van of the attack on Xue Li. As Van Leader, Chen Wu and a dozen horsemen 
made a dash into the enemy's formation, where they slew half a hundred men. So 
Xue Li would not fight but remained within his defenses. As Sun Ce was attacking 
the city, a spy came in with the news that Liu Yao and Ze Rong had gone to attack 
Niuzhu, which made Sun Ce move thither in haste. His two opponents were ready 
for battle. 


"lam here;" said Sun Ce, "you would better give in." 


A general came out from behind Liu Yao to accept the challenge. It was Yu Mi. 
But in the third bout Sun Ce made him prisoner and carried him off to the other 
side. Seeing his colleague thus captured, Fan Neng rode out to the rescue and got 
quite close. But just as he was going to thrust, all Sun Ce's soldiers shouted, "There 
is aman behind you going to strike secretly!" 


At this Sun Ce turned and shouted so thunderously loud that Fan Neng fell out of 
his saddle from mere fright. He split his skull and died. When Sun Ce reached his 
standard, he threw his prisoner to the ground. And Yu Mi was also dead, crushed to 
death between the arm and the body of his captor. So in a few moments Sun Ce 
had disposed of two enemies, one crushed to death and one frightened to death. 
Thereafter Sun Ce was called the Little Prince. 


Liu Yao had a defeat; the greater portion of his force surrendered, and the 
number of those slain exceeded ten thousand. Liu Yao himself fled to Yuzhang and 
sought safety with Liu Biao, Imperial Protector of Jingzhou. 


An attack on Moling was the next move. As soon as Sun Ce arrived at the moat, 
he summoned Commander Xue Li to surrender. Some one let fly a furtive arrow 
from the wall which wounded Sun Ce in the left thigh so severely that he fell from 
his steed. Hastily his officers picked up their wounded chief and returned to the 
camp where the arrow was pulled out and the wound dressed with the medicines 
suitable for injuries by metals. 


By Sun Ce's command the story was spread abroad that the hurt had been fatal, 
and all the soldiers set up cries of lamentation. The camp was broken up. Xue Li, 
Zhang Ying, and Chen Heng made a night sortie but fell into a carefully prepared 
ambush, and presently Sun Ce himself appeared on horseback shouting: "Sun Ce 
is here still!" 


His sudden appearance created such a panic that the soldiers dropped their 
weapons and fell on their faces. Sun Ce gave orders not to kill them. But their 
leaders fell: Zhang Ying from Chen Wu's spear thrust as he turned to run away; 
Chen Heng was killed by Jiang Qin's arrow; and the Commander, Xue Li, was slain 
in the turbulence. Thus Sun Ce got possession of Moling. Having calmed the 
people he sent his soldiers away to Jingxian, where Taishi Ci was in command. 


Taishi Ci had assembled two thousand veterans in addition to his own troops for 
the purpose of avenging his master. Sun Ce and Zhou Yu on the other hand 
consulted how to capture him alive. 


Zhou Yu planned, "Attack the city on three sides, leaving the east gate free for 
flight. Some distance off an ambush shall be prepared, when Taishi Ci, his men 
fatigued and horses spent, shall fall an easy victim." 


The latest recruits under Taishi Ci's banner were mostly hillmen and 


unaccustomed to discipline. Beside, the walls of the city were pitiably low. One 
night Sun Ce ordered Chen Wu to strip off his long dress, leave his arms save a 
dagger, clamber up the ramparts, and set fire to the city. Seeing the flames 
spreading, Taishi Ci made for the east gate and, as soon as he got outside, Sun Ce 
followed in pursuit. The pursuit was maintained for some fifteen miles when the 
pursuers stopped. Taishi Ci went on as long as possible, finally halting to rest ina 
spot surrounded by reeds. Suddenly a tremendous shouting arose. Taishi Ci was 
just starting when tripping ropes arose all round, his horse was thrown and he 
found himself a prisoner. 


Taishi Ci was taken back to camp. As soon as Sun Ce heard the news, he 
himself rode out to order the guards to leave the prisoner, whose bonds he 
loosened with his own hands. Then he took off his own embroidered robe and put it 
on the captive. They entered the camp together. 


"| Knew you were a real hero," said Sun Ce. "That worm of a Liu Yao had no use 
for such as you and so he got beaten." 


Taishi Ci, overcome by this kindness and good treatment, then formally 
surrendered. Sun Ce seized his hand and said, laughing, "If you had taken me at 
that fight we had near the shrine, would you have killed me?" 


"Who can say?" said Taishi Ci smiling. 


Sun Ce laughed also and they entered his tent, where Taishi Ci was placed in 
the seat of honor at a banquet. 


Taishi Ci said, "Can you trust me so far as to let me go to muster as many as | 
can of the soldiers of my late master. Under the smart of this defeat they will turn 
against him, and they would be a great help to you." 


"Exactly what | most desire. | will make an agreement with you that at midday 
tomorrow you will return." 


Taishi Ci agreed and went off. All the generals said he would never return. 
"He is trustworthy and will not break his word," said the chief. 


None of the officers believed he would come back. But the next day they set up a 
bamboo rod in the gate of the camp, and just as the shadow marked noon Taishi Ci 
returned, bringing with him about a thousand troops. Sun Ce was pleased, and his 
officers had to confess that he had rightly judged his man. 


Sun Ce thus marched his army to the South Land, and his enemies fled or 
surrendered before his force. He had now several legions and the southeast of the 
Great River was his. He improved the conditions of the people and maintained 


order so that his adherents and supporters daily increased. He was called Sun Ce 
the Bright. When his army approached, the people used to flee in terror; but when it 
had arrived and they saw that no one was permitted to loot and not the least 
attempt was made on their houses, they rejoiced and presented the soldiers with 
oxen and wine, for which they were in turn duly rewarded. Gladness filled the 
country side. The soldiers who had followed Liu Yao were kindly treated. Those 
who wished to join Sun Ce's army did so; those who preferred not to be soldiers 
were sent home with presents. And thus Sun Ce won the respect and praise of 
every one and became very powerful. 


Sun Ce then settled his mother and the remainder of the family in Que, setting 
his brother, Sun Quan, and Zhou Tai over the city of Xuancheng. Then he headed 
an expedition to the south to reduce Wujun. 


At that time there was a certain Yan Baihu, or the White Tiger, who styled himself 
King of Eastern Wu and ruled over Wujun. His armies stationed at Wucheng and 
Jiaxing. Hearing of Sun Ce's approach, Yan Baihu sent his brother, Yan Yu, with an 
army against Sun Ce, and they met at Juniper Bridge. Yan Yu, sword in hand, took 
his stand on the bridge, and this was reported to Sun Ce, who prepared to accept 
the challenge. 


Zhang Hong tried to dissuade him, saying, "For as much as my lord's fate is 
bound up with that of the army, he should not risk a conflict with a mere robber. | 
wish that you should remember your own value." 


"Your words, O Wise One, are as gold and precious stones, but | fear that my 
soldiers will not carry out my commands unless | myself share their dangers." 


However, Sun Ce sent forth Han Dang to take up the challenge. Just as Han 
Dang reached the bridge, Jiang Qin and Chen Wu, who had dropped down the 
river in a small boat, passed under the bridge. Though the arrows fell in clouds on 
the bank, the two men rushed up and fiercely attacked Yan Yu as he stood on the 
bridge. Yan Yu fled and Han Dang went in pursuit. But Yan Yu smote up to the west 
gate of the city into which he entered. 


Sun Ce laid siege to Wujun both by land and water. For three days no one came 
out to offer battle. Then at the head of his army, Sun Ce came to the west gate and 
summoned the warden. An officer of inconsiderable rank came out and stood with 
one hand resting on a beam while with the other he gave point to his abuse of 
those below. Quickly Taishi Ci's hands sought his bow and an arrow was on the 
string. 


"See me hit that fellow's hand," said he, turning to his companions. 


Even as the sound of his voice died away, the bowstring twanged, the arrow 
sped and lodged in the beam, firmly pinning thereto the officer's hand. Both sides, 


those on the wall and those below it, marveled and acclaimed at such 
marksmanship. 


The wounded man was taken away. When Yan Baihu the White Tiger heard of 
the exploit, he said, "How can we hope to withstand an army with such people as 
this in it?" 


And his thoughts turned toward a peace. He sent his brother Yan Yu out to see 
Sun Ce, who received him civilly, invited him into the tent, and set wine before him. 


"And what does your brother propose?" said Sun Ce. 
"He is willing to share this region with you," was the reply. 
"The rat! How dare he put himself on a level with me?" cried Sun Ce. 


Sun Ce commanded to put the messenger to death. Yan Yu started up and drew 
his sword; but out flew Sun Ce's blade, and the unhappy messenger fell to the 
ground. His head was hacked off and sent into the city to his brother. 


This had its effect. Yan Baihu saw resistance was hopeless, so he abandoned 
Wujun and fled. Sun Ce pressed the attack. Huang Gai captured Jiaxing, and 
Taishi Ci took Wucheng. Several other southern cities were fallen. The territory was 
quickly subdued. Yan Baihu rushed off toward Yuhang in the east, plundering on 
all sides, till a band of villagers under the leadership of one Ling Cao checked his 
career of robbery there. Yan Baihu then fled toward Kuaiji. 


Ling Cao and his son then went to meet Sun Ce, who took them into his service, 
and appointed them Commanders as a reward for their service, and the joint forces 
crossed the Great River. 


The White Tiger, Yan Baihu, gathered his scattered forces and took up a position 
at Western Ford, but Cheng Pu attacked him there and scattered the defenders, 
chasing them as far as Kuaiji. The Governor of the place, Wang Lang, was on Yan 
Baihu's side and inclined to support him actively. 


But, when Wang Lang proposed this, one of his officers stood forth, saying, "No! 
No! Sun Ce as a leader is humane and upright, while the White Tiger is a savage 
ruffian. Rather capture him and offer his person as a peace offering to Sun Ce." 


The Governor turned angrily toward the speaker, who was an official named Yu 
Fan from Kuaiji, and bade him be silent. Yu Fan withdrew sighing deeply. And the 
Governor went to the help of the White Tiger with whom he joined forces at 
Shanyin. 


Sun Ce came up. When both sides were arrayed, Sun Ce rode out and 


addressed Wang Lang, saying, "Mine is an army of good soldiers, and my aim is to 
restore peace to this region, but you give your support to a rebel!" 


Wang Lang replied, "Your greed is insatiable. Having got possession of Wujun, 
you want also my territory. | shall revenge for the Yans." 


This response greatly angered Sun Ce. Just as battle was to be joined, Taishi Ci 
advanced and Wang Lang came toward him waving a sword. Before they had 
exchanged many passes, Zhou Xin dashed out to help Wang Lang. Thereupon 
Huang Gai rode out to make the sides more equal. These latter two were just 
engaging when the drums rolled on both sides, and a general battle began. 


Suddenly confusion was caused in the rear of Wang Lang's army by the sudden 
onslaught of a small army. Wang Lang galloped off to see the attackers were Zhou 
Yu and Cheng Pu. Then an attack was made on his flank, so that he was in a 
hopeless position, and he and Yan Baihu and Zhou Xin, fighting desperately to cut 
an arterial alley, only just managed to reach the shelter of the city. The drawbridges 
were raised, the gates closed, and preparations made to sustain a siege. 


Sun Ce followed right up to the walls and then divided his troops so as to attack 
all four gates. Seeing that the city was being fiercely attacked, Wang Lang was for 
making a sortie, but Yan Baihu opposed this as hopeless against so strong a force 
outside. 


"We can only strengthen our position and remain behind the shelter of the 
ramparts until hunger forces the besiegers to retire," said Yan Baihu. 


Wang Lang agreed and the siege went on. 


For several days a vigorous attack was maintained, but with little success. In a 
council, Sun Jing, who was the uncle of Sun Ce, said, "Since they are holding the 
city with such resolution, it will be difficult to dislodge them. But the bulk of their 
supplies is stored at Chadu, distant only some ten miles. Our best plan is to seize 
this place, thus attacking where the enemy is unprepared, and doing what they do 
not expect." 


Sun Ce approved, saying, "My uncle's plan is admirable and will crush the 
rebels." 


So he issued orders to kindle watch fires at all the gates, and leave the flags 
standing to maintain the appearance of soldiers in position while the expedition 
went south. 


Zhou Yu came to utter a warning, "When you, my lord, go away, the besieged 
will surely come out and follow you. We might prepare a surprise for them." 


Sun Ce replied, "My preparations are complete, and the city will be captured 
tonight." 


So the army set out. Wang Lang heard that the besiegers had gone, and he 
went up to the tower to reconnoiter. He saw the fires blazing, the smoke rising, and 
the pennons fluttering in the breeze as usual and hesitated. 


Zhou Xin said, "He has gone and this is only a strategy. Let us go out and smite 
them." 


Yan Baihu said, "If he has gone, it is to attack Chadu. Let us pursue." 


"The place is our base of supply," said Wang Lang, "and must be defended. You 
two lead the way, and | will follow with reserves." 


So Yan Baihu and Zhou Xin went forth with five thousand soldiers and drew 
near their enemy about the first watch, at seven miles from the city. The road led 
through dense forest. Then suddenly the drums beat and lighted torches sprang up 
on all sides. Yan Baihu was frightened, turned his horse and started to retreat. At 
once a leader appeared in front in whom, by the glare of the torches, he recognized 
Sun Ce. Zhou Xin made a rush at him but fell under Sun Ce's spear. The men 
surrendered. However, Yan Baihu managed to cut his way out and fled to Yuhang. 


Wang Lang soon heard of the loss and, not daring to return to the city, fled in all 
haste to the coastal regions. And so Sun Ce got possession of the city of Kuaiji. 


Having restored order, a few days later a man came bringing the head of the 
White Tiger as an offering to Sun Ce. This man was a native of the county. He was 
of medium height, with a square face and wide mouth. He was named Dong Xi. 
Sun Ce appointed him Commander. After this, peace reigned in all the southeast. 
Sun Ce placed his uncle Sun Jing in command of the city and made Zhu Zhi 
Governor of Wujun. Then Sun Ce returned to his own place, south of the Great 
River. 


While Sun Ce was absent, a band of brigands suddenly attacked Xuancheng, 
left in the care of his brother Sun Quan and the leader Zhou Tai. As the onslaught 
was made on all sides at once, and in the night, the brigands got the upper hand. 
Zhou Tai took the youth in his arms and mounted a horse; but as the robbers came 
on with swords to attack him he dismounted, and though without mail, met the 
robbers on foot and slew them as they came up. Then came a horseman armed 
with a spear, but Zhou Tai laid hold of his spear and pulled him to the earth. Then 
Zhou Tai mounted the robber's horse and thrusting this way and that with the spear 
fought his way out. So Sun Quan was preserved, but his savior had received more 
than a dozen wounds. However, the bandits went away. 


These wounds being due to metal would not heal but swelled enormously, and 


the brave soldier's life hung in the balance. Sun Ce returned and was deeply 
grieved. Then Dong Xi said, "Once in an engagement with some coastal pirates, | 
received many spear wounds, but a certain wise man named Yu Fan 
recommended a surgeon who cured me in half a month." 


"Surely this must be Yu Fan of Kuaiji," replied Sun Ce. "That is he; he is so 
called." 


"Yes, truly a wise man; | would employ him." 


So Sun Ce sent two officers to invite Yu Fan, and he came at once. He was 
treated in most friendly fashion and appointed an official forthwith. Then the 
question of treating the wounded man was brought up. 


"The surgeon is one Hua Tuo from Qiao, who has perfectly marvelous medicine 
skill. | will get him to come," said Yu Fan. 


Shortly the famous Hua Tuo arrived, a man with the complexion of a youth and a 
snowy beard. He looked more like a saint who had passed the gates of this life. He 
was treated very warmly and taken to see the sick general's wounds. 


"The case is not difficult," said the surgeon. 


And he prepared certain drugs that healed the wounds within a month. Sun Ce 
suitably acknowledged his care and skill, and he was allowed to leave with rich 
rewards. 


Next Sun Ce attacked the brigands and destroyed them, so restoring complete 
tranquillity to the South Land. After this he set garrisons at all the strategic points in 
the old state of Wu, and this done, memorialized what he had achieved to the 
Throne. He came to an understanding with Cao Cao and sent letters to Yuan Shu 
demanding the return of the Imperial Hereditary Seal he had left in pledge. 


But Yuan Shu, secretly cherishing the most ambitious designs, wrote excuses 
and did not return the state jewel. In his own place Yuan Shu hastily summoned 
about thirty of his officers to a council. Among them were Adviser Yang Dajiang and 
Generals Zhang Xun, Ji Ling, Qiao Rui, Lei Bo, and Chen Lan. 


Yuan Shu said, "Sun Ce borrowed an army from me and set out on an 
expedition which has made him master of the South Land. Now he says nothing of 
repayment but demands the token of his pledge. Truly he is a boor, and what steps 
can | take to destroy him?" 


Yang Dajiang replied, "You cannot do any thing against him, for he is too 
strongly placed, the Great River as the shield. You must first remove Liu Bei in 
revenge for having attacked you without cause, and then you may think about Sun 


Ce. | have a scheme to put the former into your hands in a very short time." 


Yuan Shu went not to destroy the tiger, but instead 
Against a dragon forth his army led. 


The means Yang Dajiang employed will be made plain in the next chapter. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 16: 
In The Camp Gate, Lu Bu Shoots The Halberd; 
At River Yu, Cao Cao Suffers Defeat. 


Adviser Yang Dajiang knew how to remove Liu Bei. 
"What is your plan of attack on Liu Bei?" said Yuan Shu. 


Yang Dajiang replied, "Though Liu Bei, now camped at Xiaopei, could easily be 
taken, yet Lu Bu is strongly posted at the chief city near. And | think Lu Bu would 
help Liu Bei if it was only for the grudge he bears against you for not having given 
him the gold and studs, grain and horses you promised. First of all you should send 
Lu Bu a present whereby to engage his affections and keep him quiet while you 
deal with Liu Bei. You can see to Lu Bu after this is done, and Xuzhou is yours." 


Thereupon two hundred thousand carts of millet was sent, with letters, by the 
hand of Han Yin. The gift pleased Lu Bu greatly; and he treated the messenger with 
great cordiality. Feeling sure of no trouble from that quarter, Yuan Shu told off one 
hundred thousand troops against Xiaopei. The army was led by Ji Ling as 
commanding general, and Lei Bo and Chen Lan as generals. 


When Liu Bei heard these things he called his officers to take counsel. Zhang 


Fei was for open war forthwith. But Sun Qian said, "Our resources were too small; 
therefore, we must lay the position before Lu Bu and ask help." 


"Do you think that fellow will do anything?" said Zhang Fei cynically. 
Liu Bei decided in favor of Sun Qian's proposal and wrote as follows: 


"Humbly | venture to remind you that | am here by your orders and enjoy repose 
as the result of your kindness, extensive as the heavens. Now Yuan Shu, moved by 
a desire for revenge, is sending a force against this place, and its destruction is 
imminent unless you intervene to save it. | trust you will send an army quickly to 
protect the town, and our happiness will be inexpressible." 


Receiving this Lu Bu called in Chen Gong to whom he said, "| have just received 
gifts from Yuan Shu and a letter, with the intent of restraining me from helping Liu 
Bei. Now comes a letter from Liu Bei asking help. It seems to me that Liu Bei where 
he is can do me no harm; but if Yuan Shu overcomes Liu Bei and comes to an 
understanding with the leaders around the Huashang Mountains, then the power of 
the north is so much nearer, and | should be unable to resist the attacks of so many 
leaders and should never sleep secure. | will aid Liu Bei; that is the better course 
for me." 


Now Yuan Shu's force sent against Xiaopei went thither as quickly as possible, 
and soon the country to the southeast fluttered with pennons by day and blazed 
with watch fires by night, while the rolling of the drums reverberated from heaven to 
earth. 


The five thousand troops at Liu Bei's disposal were led out of the city and 
arranged to make a brave show, but it was good news to him to hear that Lu Bu 
had arrived and was quite near. Lu Bu camped only half a mile away to the 
southwest. When Yuan Shu's general, Ji Ling, heard of his arrival, he wrote letters 
reproaching Lu Bu for his treachery. Lu Bu smiled as he read them. 

"| Know how to make both of them love me," said Lu Bu. 

So he sent invitations to both Liu Bei and Ji Ling to come to a banquet. 


Liu Bei was for accepting the invitation and going, but his brothers dissuaded 
him, saying, "There is some treachery in his heart." 


"| have treated him too well for him to do me any harm," said Liu Bei. 


So he mounted and rode away, the two brothers following. They came to the 
camp. 


The host said, "Now by a special effort | have got you out of danger; | hope you 


will not forget that when you come into your own." 


Liu Bei thanked him heartily and was invited to take a seat. Guan Yu and Zhang 
Fei took up their usual place as guards. 


But when Ji Ling was announced, Liu Bei felt a spasm of fear and got up to go 
away. 


"You two are invited for the particular purpose of a discussion," said the host. 
"Do not take it amiss." 


Liu Bei, being quite ignorant of his intentions, was very uneasy. Presently his 
fellow guest entered. Seeing Liu Bei in the tent, and in the seat of honor, Ji Ling 
was puzzled, hesitated and tried to withdraw. But the attendants prevented this and 
Lu Bu, advancing, laid hold of him and drew him into the tent as he had been a 
child. 

"Do you wish to slay me?" asked Ji Ling. 

"Not at all," replied Lu Bu. 

"Then you are going to slay Long-Ears?" 

"No; not that." 


"Then what does it mean?" 


"Liu Bei and | are brothers. Now, General, you are besieging him, and so | have 
come to the rescue." 


"Then slay me," said Ji Ling. 

"There would be no sense in that. All my life | have disliked fighting and quarrels, 
but have loved making peace. And now | want to settle the quarrel between you 
two." 

"May | ask how you think of doing so?" 

"| have a means and one approved of Heaven itself." 

Then Lu Bu drew Ji Ling within the tent and led him up to Liu Bei. The two men 
faced each other, full of mutual suspicion, but their host placed himself between 


them and they took their seats, Liu Bei on the right hand of the host. 


The banquet began. After a number of courses almost in silence, Lu Bu spoke, 
saying, "| wish you two gentlemen to listen to me and put an end to your strife." 


Liu Bei made no reply, but Ji Ling said, "| have come with an army of one 
hundred thousand at the express bidding of my master to take Liu Bei. How can | 
cease the strife? | must fight." 


"What!" exclaimed Zhang Fei drawing his sword. "Few as we are, we regard you 
no more than a lot of children. What are you compared with a million Yellow 
Scarves? You dare hurt our brother!" 


Guan Yu urged him to be silent, saying, "Let us see what General Lu Bu has to 
say first; after that there will be time to go to our tents and fight." 


"| beg you both to come to an understanding. | cannot let you fight," said Lu Bu. 


Now on one side Ji Ling was discontented and angry; on the other Zhang Fei 
was dying for a fight; and neither of the two chiefly concerned would signify assent. 
Then suddenly the host turned to his attendants, saying, "Bring my trident halberd!" 


They did so, and he sat there gripping that graceful but effective weapon in his 
right hand. Both guests felt very ill at ease and turned pale. 


Lu Bu went on, saying, "| have tried to persuade you to make peace, for that is 
the command of the Most High. It shall be put to the test." 


He then bade his servants take the halberd outside beyond the gate and set it 
up. Then speaking to his two guests, he said, "That gate is one hundred and fifty 
paces distant. If | can hit that left branch of the halberd-head with an arrow, you will 
both withdraw your armies. If | miss, you can go away and prepare for immediate 
battle. | shall stand against either of you who does not abide by what | say." 


Ji Ling thought to himself, "That small mark at that distance! How could any one 
hit it?" 


So he assented, thinking he would have plenty of fighting after his host had 
missed the mark. Of course Liu Bei was willing. 


They all sat down again and wine was served. When this had been drunk the 
host called for his bow and arrows. Liu Bei silently prayed that he would hit the 
mark. 


Lu Bu turned back his sleeves, carefully fitted an arrow to the string and pulled 
the bow to its utmost stretch. A slight exclamation escaped him as the bow curved 
like the harvest moon sailing through the sky. "Twang!" went the bowstring, and the 
arrow sped like a falling star. And it struck the slender tongue of the halberd head 
full and square. A roar of acclamation from all sides greeted the exploit. 


The multitude people often hail their praise: 


O Lu Bu was a wonderful archer, 
And the arrow he shot sped straight; 

By hitting the mark he saved his friend 
That day at his camp gate. 

Hou Yi, the archer of ancient days, 
Brought down each mocking sun, 

And the apes that gibbered to fright Yang Youji 
Were slain by him, one by one. 

But we sing of Lu Bu that drew the bow, 
And his feathered shaft that flew; 

For one hundred thousand soldiers could doff their mails 
When he hit the mark so true. 


Lu Bu laughed loud at the success of his shot. Dropping his bow he seized his 
guests by the hands, saying, "The command of Heaven indeed! And now you 
cease from fighting!" 


He ordered the soldier attendants to pour out great goblets of wine and each 
drank. Liu Bei in his inmost heart felt rather lucky; his fellow guest sat silent, 
nodding his head. Presently he said, "| cannot disobey your command, General, 
but let me depart. What will my master say and will he believe me?" 


"| will write a letter and confirm it," said Lu Bu. 


After a few more rounds of the wine, Ji Ling asked that he might have the letter 
and after that departed. When the brothers took their leave, Lu Bu again reminded 
Liu Bei, saying, "Do not forget | have delivered you today!" 


Liu Bei thanked him and departed. Next day the leaders broke camps, and the 
soldiers were gone. When Ji Ling had got back to the South of River Huai and told 
the story of the feat of archery and the peace making that followed, and had 
presented the letter, his lord was very wroth. 


"Lu Bu repays me for all my grain with this bit of play acting!" cried Yuan Shu. 
"He has saved Liu Bei, but | will lead a large army myself and settle both Liu Bei 
and him." 


"Be careful, my lord," said Ji Ling. "Lu Bu is braver and stronger than most 
leaders and has wide territory. He and Liu Bei together make a powerful 
combination, not easy to break. But there is another course. | have found out that 
his wife, Lady Yan, has a daughter just of marriageable age; and as you have a 
son, you could arrange a marriage alliance with Lu Bu. If his daughter wedded your 


son, Lu Bu would certainly slay your enemy for you. This is called 'Relative-above- 
Stranger’ plan." 


This scheme appealed to Yuan Shu, who soon set about its accomplishment. He 
sent presents by the hand of Han Yin, who was to discuss the question. 


When Han Yin saw Lu Bu, he said, "My master has an immense respect for you, 
Illustrious Sir, and he desires to ensure perpetual alliance between the two families 
by a marriage, an alliance such as existed between the ancient states of Qin and 
Jin." 


Lu Bu was well disposed toward the scheme, but went in to consult his wife. 
Now Lu Bu had two wives and one concubine. He first married a lady of the Yan 
family, and she was the legal wife. Then he took Diao Chan as a concubine. And 
while he was living at Xiaopei, he had married a secondary wife, a daughter of Cao 
Bao. Lady Cao had died quite young leaving no issue. Neither had Diao Chan 
borne any children. So that Lu Bu had but one child, this daughter, of whom he was 
dotingly fond. 


When he broached the subject, his wife said, "The Yuans have dominated the 
regions around the River Huai these many years. They have a large army and are 
very prosperous. One day a Yuan will become emperor, and our daughter may 
hope to be an empress. But how many sons has Yuan Shu?" 


"Only this one." 


"Then we should accept the offer. Even if our daughter does not become an 
Empress, Xuzhou has a new ally." 


Lu Bu decided to accept and so treated the messenger with extreme generosity. 
Han Yin went back with a favorable answer. The wedding gifts were then prepared 
ready for Han Yin to take to the bride's family. They were received and banquets 
and merry-making filled all the time. 


Next day Chen Gong went to see the messenger in his lodging, and when the 
usual ceremonies and greetings had been exchanged, the two men sat down to 
talk. When the servants had been sent out of earshot, Chen Gong said, "Who 
originated this scheme by which Yuan Shu and Lu Bu are to become connections 
by this marriage so that Liu Bei's head may fall?" 


Han Yin was terrified. 
"| pray you not to let it get abroad," said he. 


"| certainly shall keep it secret. But if there be any delay, some other person will 
find it out and that spells failure," said Chen Gong. 


"What would best be done?" 


"| will see Lu Bu and get him to send the girl immediately so that the marriage 
may be concluded quickly." 


"If it happened thus, my master would indeed hold you in high respect." 
With this Chen Gong took his leave and sought an interview with Lu Bu. 


"| hear your daughter is to be married to Yuan Shu's son. That is capital, but no 
one knows when." 


"That has yet to be considered." 

"There were certain fixed rules as to the period between sending presents and 
consummation of the marriage; emperors, a year; nobles, half a year; high officers, 
three months; and common people, one month." 

Lu Bu replied, "As to Yuan Shu, Heaven has already put into his hands the 
Imperial Hereditary Seal and he will surely arrive at the dignity one day. So, | 
should think the imperial rule would apply." 

"No; it will not." 

"The nobles' rule, then?" 

"No; nor that." 

"The high officers'?" 


"Not even that." 


Lu Bu laughed, saying, "Then you mean me to go by the rule for common 
people." 


"Nor that either." 
"Then what do you mean?" 


"In the midst of the present troubles, when there is great rivalry among the 
nobles, do you not see that the others will be exceedingly jealous of your marriage 
alliance with such a high family as the Yuans? Suppose you postpone the choice 
of the day, most likely when your fine morning arrives, the wedding party will fall 
into an ambush on the road and the bride be carried off. Then what could be done? 
My opinion is that you would have done better to refuse. But since you have 


consented, then carry out the plan at once before the lords hear of it, and so send 
the girl over without delay to Shouchun. You can hire a lodging there till you have 
selected the wedding day, and the odds are greatly against any failure." 


"What you say is quite to the point," replied Lu Bu. 


He went into the private apartments to see his wife and told her the bride elect 
would set out immediately and the trousseau was to be prepared as far as it could 
be. On his side he chose some good horses and had a wedding carriage got 
ready. The escort consisted of Han Yin and two of Lu Bu's generals, Song Xian and 
Wei Xu. The procession went out of the city to the sound of music. 


Now at this time Chen Gui, father of Chen Deng, was placidly waiting till the 
evening of his life passed into night. Hearing this burst of music he inquired the 
occasion, and the servants told him. 


"They are working on the 'Relative-above-Stranger' device, then," said Chen 
Gui. "Liu Bei is in danger." 


Thereupon in spite of his many infirmities he went to see Lu Bu. 
"Noble Sir, what brings you here?" asked Lu Bu. 

"| heard you were dead and | came to mourn," quavered the old man. 
"Who said that?" exclaimed his host. 


"Once upon a time you received grand presents from Yuan Shu that you might 
slay Liu Bei, but you got out by that clever shot at your halberd. Now they suddenly 
seek a marriage alliance thinking to get hold of your daughter as a pledge. The 
next move will be an attack on Xiaopei and, that gone, where are you? Whatever 
they ask in future, grain or troops or anything else, and you yield, will bring your 
own end nearer, and make you hated all round. If you refuse, then you are false to 
the duties of a relative, and that will be an excuse to attack you openly. Beside this 
Yuan Shu intends to call himself emperor, which would be rebellion, and you 
would be of the rebel's family; something abominable, which the multitude people 
would not suffer." 


Lu Bu was much disturbed to hear this. 

"| have been misled!" cried he. 

So he hurriedly sent Zhang Liao to bring the wedding party, which had been ten 
miles away, back to the city. When they had come, Lu Bu threw Han Yin into prison 


and sent a reply to Yuan Shu saying curtly that the girl's trousseau was not ready 
and she could not be married till it was. 


Chen Gui wanted Han Yin to be sent to the capital, Xuchang. But Lu Bu was 
hesitating what course to adopt, when he heard that Liu Bei was enlisting soldiers 
and buying horses for no apparent reason. 


"He is simply doing his duty; there is nothing to be surprised at," said Lu Bu at 
first. 


Then came two officers, Song Xian and Wei Xu, saying, "As you ordered us, we 
went into the Huashang Mountains to purchase horses. We had got three hundred 
when, on our way back, on the borders of Xiaopei some robbers stole half of them. 
We hear that the real robbers were Zhang Fei and his soldiers, who took on the 
guise of brigands." 


Lu Bu was very angry at this and began to prepare an expedition against 
Xiaopei. When Liu Bei heard that an attack threatened, he led out his army to 
oppose it, and the two armies were arrayed. Liu Bei rode to the front and said, 
"Elder Brother, why have you brought an army against me?" 


Lu Bu began abusing him, saying, "That shot of mine at the Archery Feast saved 
you from grave danger; why then did you steal my horses?" 


"| wanted horses and | sent out to buy them. Should | dare to take yours?" said 
Liu Bei. 


"You stole a hundred and fifty in the person of your brother Zhang Fei. You only 
used another man's hand." 


Thereupon Zhang Fei, with his spear set, rode out, saying, "Yes; | stole your 
good horses, and what more do you expect?" 


Lu Bu replied, "You goggled-eyed thief! You are always treating me with 
contempt." 


"Yes; | took your horses and you get angry. You did not say any thing when you 
stole my brother's Xuzhou." 


Lu Bu rode forward to give battle, and Zhang Fei advanced. A reckless fight 
began, and the two warriors kept it up for a hundred bouts without a decisive 
stroke. Then Liu Bei, fearing some accident to his brother, hastily beat the gongs as 
a signal to retire and led his army into the city. Lu Bu then invested it. 

Liu Bei called his brother and chided him as the cause of all this misfortune. 


"Where are the horses?" said Liu Bei. 


"In some of the temples and courts," replied Zhang Fei. 


Liu Bei sent a messenger out to speak softly and offer to restore the stolen 
horses if hostilities were to cease. Lu Bu was disposed to agree but Chen Gong 
opposed. 


"You will suffer by and by if you do not remove this Liu Bei." 


Under Chen Gong's influence the request for peace was rejected, and the 
attackers on the city pressed harder. 


Liu Bei called Mi Zhu and Sun Qian to him to ask advice. 


Said Sun Qian, "The one person that Cao Cao detests is Lu Bu. Let us then 
abandon the city and take refuge with Cao Cao, from whom we may borrow troops 
to destroy him." 


"If we try to get away, who will lead the van?" 
"| will do my best," said Zhang Fei. 


So Zhang Fei led the way; Guan Yu was rearguard; and in the center was Liu 
Bei with the non-fighting portion. The cavalcade started and went out at the north 
gate under the bright moon. They met opposition from Song Xian and Wei Xu's 
men, but the soldiers were driven off by Zhang Fei, and the besieging force was 
passed without difficulty. Zhang Liao pursued, but was held off by Guan Yu's 
rearguard. It seemed Lu Bu was not dissatisfied at the flight, for he took no personal 
trouble to prevent it. He made formal entry into the city, settled local affairs, and 
appointed Gao Shun as Governor. 


Liu Bei approached Xuchang and encamped outside the city, whence he sent 
Sun Qian to see Cao Cao and relate the events that brought him there. Cao Cao 
was very friendly and said, "Liu Bei is as my brother." 


Then Cao Cao invited Liu Bei to enter the city. 
Leaving his brothers at the camp, Liu Bei, with Sun Qian and Mi Zhu, went to 
Cao Cao, who received him with the greatest respect. The story of Lu Bu's perfidy 


was again related. 


"He has no sense of right," said Cao Cao. "You and I, my brother, will attack him 
together." 


Liu Bei was very grateful. A banquet was then prepared, and it was late evening 
before the visitor left for his own camp. 


Xun Yu then had an interview with his master and said, "If you are not on your 
guard, Liu Bei will be your undoing. You ought to destroy him. He is too much of a 
hero." 


Cao Cao made no reply and his adviser retired. Presently Guo Jia came, and 
Cao Cao said, "| have been advised to kill Liu Bei; what of such a scheme?" 


"A bad scheme," said Guo Jia. "You are the popular champion, pledged to 
relieve the people from oppression, and only by truth and rectitude can you secure 
the support of the noble-minded. Your only fear is lest they stay away. Now Liu Bei 
is clearly a hero. He has come to you for help and protection, and to put him to 
death would be to alienate all good people and put fear into the hearts of all the 
able advisers. Hampered by these difficulties, where will you find those whose help 
you need? To remove the dangers represented by one man and thereby injure 
yourself in the eyes of all humankind is a sure means of destruction. These 
conditions need careful consideration." 


"What you say exactly fits in with what | think," said Cao Cao, greatly pleased 
with these remarks. 


His next step was to memorialize the Emperor to give Liu Bei the imperial 
protectorship of Yuzhou. 


Again Cheng Yu said, "Liu Bei is certain to rise to the top; he will never remain in 
a subordinate position. You would better remove him." 


Cao Cao answered, "Now is just the time to make use of good people. | will not 
forfeit the regard of the world for the sake of removing one individual. Guo Jia and | 
both see this in the same light." 


Wherefore Cao Cao rejected all persuasion to work against Liu Bei but sent him 
three thousand soldiers and ten thousand carts of grain, and set him on his way to 
Yuzhou. Liu Bei was to march to Xiaopei, occupy it, call together his former 
soldiers, and attack Lu Bu. 


When Liu Bei reached Yuzhou, he sent to inform Cao Cao, who prepared to 
march an army to subjugate Lu Bu. But just then hasty news came that Zhang Ji, 
who had gone to the attack of Nanyang, had been wounded by a stray arrow and 
had died. His nephew, Zhang Xiu, had succeeded to the command of his army; and 
with Jia Xu as strategist, Zhang Xiu had joined Liu Biao and camped at Wancheng. 
They intended to attack the capital and get possession of the Emperor's person. 


Cao Cao was placed in a quandary. He would go to attack this combination, but 
he feared lest Lu Bu would attack the capital if he left it. So he sought the advice of 
Xun Yu. 


Said the Adviser, "Lu Bu has no notion of a policy. He is led astray by any little 
advantage that presents itself to his eyes. All you need do is to obtain promotion for 
him, giving him some additional title, and tell him to make peace with Liu Bei, and 
he will do it. The south is no threat then." 


"Good," said Cao Cao. 


And he acted upon the hint and sent an Imperial Legate, Wang Ze, to Xuzhou 
with the official announcement and a letter urging peace, while he went on with 
preparations to meet the other danger from Zhang Xiu. 


When ready Cao Cao marched out with one hundred fifty thousand troops in 
three divisions. Xiahou Dun was the Van Leader, and they went to River Yu and 
camped there. 


Jia Xu succeeded in persuading Zhang Xiu of the hopelessness of resistance. 


"You would do well to surrender, since Cao Cao's army is too large for you to 
oppose," said Jia Xu. 


Seeing the truth of this, Zhang Xiu sent his adviser to propose sub mission. Cao 
Cao was greatly pleased with the messenger, admiring his ready and fluent 
repartee, and tried to win him to his service. 


"| was formerly with Li Jue and was guilty with him. Now | am with Zhang Xiu 
who esteems my advice, and | should not like to abandon him," said Jia Xu. 


Jia Xu left and next day conducted his master into Cao Cao's presence. Cao 
Cao was very generous. Then he entered Wancheng with a small force, the greater 
part of the army being put in camp outside where the lines extended some three 
miles. Great banquets were given every day by Zhang Xiu, and Cao Cao was 
always being entertained. 


One day, when Cao Cao returned to his quarters in a more than usual merry 
mood, he asked the attendants if there were any singing girls in the city. His 
nephew, Cao Amin, heard the question and said, "Peeping through one of the 
partitions last evening, | saw a perfectly beautiful woman in one of the courts. They 
told me she was the wife of Zhang Ji, Zhang Xiu's uncle. She is very lovely." 


Cao Cao, inflamed by the description given him of the beauty, told his nephew to 
go and bring her to visit him. Cao Amin did so, supported by an armed escort, and 
very soon the woman stood before Cao Cao. 


She was a beauty indeed, and Cao Cao asked her name. She replied, "Thy 
handmaid was wife to Zhang Ji; | was born of the Zhou family." 


"Do you know who | am?" 


"| have known the Prime Minister by reputation a long time. | am happy to see 
him and be permitted to bow before him," said she. 


"It was for your sake that | allowed Zhang Xiu to submit; otherwise | would have 
slain him and cut him off root and branch," said Cao Cao. 


"Indeed, then, | owe my very life to you; | am very grateful," said she. 


"TO see you is a glimpse of paradise, but there is one thing | should like better. 
Stay here and go with me to the capital where | will see that you are properly cared 
for. What do you say to that, my lady?" 


She could but thank him. 


"But Zhang Xiu will greatly wonder at my prolonged absence, and gossips will 
begin to talk," said she. 


"If you like, you can leave the city tomorrow." 


She did so; but instead of going at once to the capital, she stayed with him 
among the tents, where Dian Wei was appointed as a special guard over her 
apartments. Cao Cao was the only person whom she saw, and he passed the days 
in idle dalliance with the lady, quite content to let time flow by. 


But people told Zhang Xiu what had gone amiss, and he was angry at the 
shame brought upon the family. He confided his trouble to Jia Xu who said, "Keep 
this secret, wait till he appears again to carry on business, and then do so and so." 


A plan was arranged quite secretly. Next day Zhang Xiu went into Cao Cao's 
tent, saying, "Since the surrendered troops are deserting in great number, it would 
be well to camp them in the center of your camp to prevent this." 


Cao Cao gave the permission, and Zhang Xiu moved and placed his army in 
four camps. 


But Dian Wei, the especial guard of Cao Cao's tent, was a man to be feared, 
being both brave and powerful. It was hard to know how to attack him. So counsel 
was taken with Hu Juer, the commander of one camp and a man of enormous 
strength and activity. He could carry a burden of six hundred pounds and two 
hundred miles in a day. Hu Juer proposed a plan. 


He said, "The fearsome thing about Dian Wei is his double halberds. But get him 
to come to a party and make him quite drunk before you send him back. | will 
mingle among his escort and so get into his tent and steal away his weapons. One 


need not fear him then." 


So the necessary arms were prepared and orders given in the various camps. 
This done Zhang Xiu gave a banquet, and the intended victim was invited and 
plied vigorously with wine so that he was quite intoxicated when he left. And, as 
arranged, Hu Juer mingled with his escort and made away with his weapons. 


That night, when Cao Cao was at supper with Lady Zhou, he heard the voices of 
men and neighing of horses and sent out to ask what it meant. They told him it was 
the night patrol going the rounds, and he was satisfied. 


Near the second watch of the night again was heard some noise in the rear of 
his tent, and one of the fodder carts was reported to be burning. 


"One of the soldiers has dropped a spark; there is nothing to be alarmed at," said 
Cao Cao. 


But very soon the fire spread on all sides and became alarming. Cao Cao called 
Dian Wei. But he, usually so alert, was lying down quite intoxicated. 


However, the beating of gongs and rolling of drums mingling with his dreams 
awoke Dian Wei, and he jumped up. His trusty halberds had disappeared. The 
enemy was near. He hastily snatched up an infantryman's sword and rushed out. At 
the gate he saw a crowd of spearmen just bursting in. Dian Wei rushed at them 
slashing all around him, and twenty or more fell beneath his blows. The others 
drew back. But the spears stood around him like reeds on the river bank. Being 
totally without mail, he was soon wounded in several places. He fought desperately 
till his sword snapped and was no longer of any use. Throwing it aside he seized a 
couple of soldiers and with their bodies as weapons felled ten of his opponents. 
The others dared not approach, but they shot arrows at him. These fell thick as rain, 
but he still maintained the gate against the assailants. 


However, the mutineers got in by the rear of the camp, and they wounded Dian 
Wei in the back with spear thrusts. Uttering a loud cry he fell. The blood gushed 
from the wound in torrents, and he died. Even after he was dead not a man dared 
to come in by the main gate. 


Cao Cao, relying on Dian Wei to hold the main gate, had fled in haste by the 
rear gate. Cao Amin accompanied him on foot. Then Cao Cao was wounded by an 
arrow in the arm, and three arrows struck his horse. However, fortunately, the horse 
was a fine Dawan beast full of spirit and, in spite of its wounds, it bore its master 
swiftly and well as far as the bank of River Yu. 


Here some of the pursuers came up, and Cao Amin was hacked to pieces. Cao 
Cao dashed into the river and reached the further side, but there an arrow struck 
his steed in the eye and it fell. Cao Cao's eldest son, Cao Ang, dismounted and 


yielded his horse to his father, who galloped on. Cao Ang was killed by arrows, but 
Cao Cao himself got away. Soon after he met several of his officers who had rallied 
a few troops. 


The soldiers of Qingzhou under Xiahou Dun seized the occasion to plunder the 
people. Yu Jin took his army, fell upon them, and slew many. Thus he protected 
and appeased the people. The plunderers, meeting Cao Cao on the road, knelt 
down howling and said Yu Jin had mutinied and attacked them. Cao Cao was 
surprised, and he gave order to Xiahou Dun, Xu Chu, Li Dian, and Yue Jin to attack 
Yu Jin. 


Now when Yu Jin saw his master and a great company approaching, he at once 
stopped the attack and set his troops to make a camp. 


An officer asked him, "The Qingzhou soldiers say you have turned traitor; why do 
you not explain now that the Prime Minister has arrived? Why first make a camp?" 


Yu Jin replied, "Our enemies are coming up in our rear and are very close. It is 
necessary to prepare for defense or we shall not withstand them. Explanation is a 
small matter, but defense is very important." 


Soon after the camp was finished, Zhang Xiu fell upon them. Yu Jin himself rode 
out to face them. Zhang Xiu drew back. The other generals of Yu Jin, seeing he 
advance thus boldly, also attacked, and Zhang Xiu was overcome. They pursued 
him a great distance until his force was almost annihilated. With the miserable 
remnant he finally fled to Liu Biao. 


Cao Cao's army reformed, and the commanders mustered. Then Yu Jin went to 
see his master and told him of the conduct of the Qingzhou soldiers and their 
looting and why he had attacked them. 


"Why did you not tell me before you made the camp?" 
Yu Jin related what had occurred. 


Said Cao Cao, "When the first thought of a leader in the time of greatest stress is 
to maintain order and to strengthen his defenses, giving no thought to slander but 
shouldering his burdens bravely, and when he thereby turns a defeat into a victory, 
who, even of the ancient leaders, can excel Yu Jin?" 


Cao Cao rewarded Yu Jin with a golden armor and the lordship of Yishou. But 
Cao Cao reprimanded Xiahou Dun for the lack of discipline among his soldiers. 


Sacrifices in honor of the dead warrior Dian Wei were instituted. Cao Cao 
himself led the wailing and paid due honors. Turning to his officers he said, "| have 
lost my first born son, but | grieve not so heavily for him as for Dian Wei. | weep for 


him." 


All were sad at the loss of this general. Then orders were issued to return to the 
capital. 


When Imperial Legate Wang Ze, bearing the imperial decree, reached Xuzhou, 
he was met by Lu Bu, who conducted him into the residence where the decree was 
read. It conferred Lu Bu the title General Who Pacifies the East, and a special seal 
accompanied the mandate. The private mediating letter was also handed over and 
the messenger detailed the high appreciation in which Lu Bu was held by the Chief 
Minister of State. Lu Bu was greatly pleased. 


Next came news that a messenger from Yuan Shu had arrived. When he had 
been introduced, he said, "My master's project of declaring himself emperor is 
advancing. He has already built a palace and will speedily choose Empress and 
concubines and would come to the South of River Huai. He is looking forward to 
receiving the fiancee of the Heir Apparent." 


"Has the rebel gone so far?" cried Lu Bu in a rage. 


He put the messenger to death and Han Yin into the cage. He drafted a 
memorial of thanks and sent it to the capital, at the same time sending, too, Han 
Yin, the unfortunate agent who had arranged the marriage alliance. He also replied 
to Cao Cao's private meditating letter asking to be confirmed in his protectorship of 
Xuzhou. The letter was sent by the hand of Chen Deng. 


Cao Cao was pleased to hear of the rupture of the marriage arrangement 
between the houses of Yuans and Lus, and forthwith put Han Yin to death in the 
market place. 


However, Chen Deng secretly told Cao Cao, saying, "Lu Bu is cruel, stupid, and 
facile. The longer he remains, the worse." 


"| Know Lu Bu quite well," replied Cao Cao. "He is a wolf with a savage heart, 
and it will be hard to feed him for long. If it had not been for you and your father, | 
should not have known all the circumstances and you must help me to get rid of 
him." 


"Anything the Prime Minister wishes to do shall have my assistance," was the 
reply. 

As a reward Cao Cao obtained an annually grant of two thousand carts of grain 
for Chen Gui and the governorship of Guangling for Chen Deng, who then took his 
leave. 


As he was saying farewell, Cao Cao took him by the hand, saying, "I shall 


depend upon you in the eastern affairs." 


Chen Deng nodded acquiescence. Then he returned to Lu Bu, who asked him 
how the visit was. 


Chen Deng told him, "My father received a generous annuity, and | was made 
Governor of Guangling." 


Lu Bu enraged, saying, "You did not ask Xuzhou for me, but you got something 
for yourself. Your father advised me to help Cao Cao by breaking off the marriage, 
and now | get nothing at all of what | asked, while you and your father get 
everything. | have been victimized by your father." 


He threatened Chen Deng with his sword. 
Chen Deng only laughed, saying, "O General, how unwary you are!" 
"|, unwary?" 


"When | saw Cao Cao, | said that to keep you going was like feeding a tiger. The 
tiger must be kept fully fed or he would eat humans. But Cao Cao laughed and 
replied, 'No; not that. One must treat the Commander like a falcon. Not feed it till the 
foxes and hares are done. Hungry, the bird is of use; full fed it flies away.' | asked 
who were the quarry. He replied, 'Yuan Shu of the South of River Huai, Sun Ce of 
the South Land, Yuan Shao of Jizhou, Liu Biao of Jingzhou, Liu Zhang of Yiazhou, 
and Zhang Lu of Hanzhong; these are the foxes and hares." 


Lu Bu threw aside his sword and laughed, saying, "Yes; he understands me." 
But just about that time came news of the advance of Yuan Shu on Xuzhou, and 


that frightened Lu Bu. 


When discord rose between Qin and Jin, 

They were attacked by Yue and Wu, 

And when a promised bride never came, 

An army marched against army to enforce the claim. 


How all this fell out will be shown in the next chapter. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 17: 
Yuan Shu Marches Out An Army Of Seven Divisions; 
Cao Cao And Three Generals Join Forces. 


The south of River Huai was very fruitful, and Yuan Shu, as governor of such a 
large territory, was very influential. He was not a little puffed up. The possession of 
the Imperial Hereditary Seal, pledged by Sun Ce, added to his pride. And he 
seriously thought of assuming the full style. 


As a preliminary he assembled all his officers and addressed them thus: "The 
Supreme Ancestor, the Founder of Han Dynasty, was only a very minor official, and 
yet he became ruler of the empire. The dynasty has endured four centuries, and its 
measure of fortune has run out. It no longer possesses authority; the cauldron is on 
the point of boiling over. My family has held the highest offices of state for four 
generations and is universally respected. Wherefore | wish, in response to the will 
of Heaven and the desire of the people, to assume the Imperial Dignity. What think 
ye of the proposal, my officers?" 


Secretary Yan Xiang rose in opposition at once, saying, "You may not do this. 
Prince Wen, the Ancestor of the Zhou, was of distinguished virtue and held many 
offices; till the last years of Shang Dynasty, he had two thirds of the empire. Still he 
served and was loyal to the ruling house. Your house is honorable, but it is not so 
glorious as that of Zhou. The Hans may be reduced, but they are not so abominably 
cruel as those of the Shang Dynasty that they are to be overthrown. Indeed this 
should not be done." 


Yuan Shu did not hear this with pleasure. 


Said he, "We Yuans came from the Chen family, the same ancestry with King 
Shun. By the rule of interpreting the signs of fate, the day has come when earth 
(Chen) receives fire (Liu). Beside there is an oracle saying, 'One who replaces the 
Hans must wade through deep mire.' My name means 'the high road.' It fits exactly. 


Further than this, | possess the Imperial Hereditary Seal and must become lord of 
all or | turn from Heaven's own way. Finally, | have made up my mind, so if any one 
says too much, that person will simply suffer death." 


Yuan Shu arrogated himself the insignia of royalty and assigned Second Glory 
the reign title. He set up officials with titles only given by an emperor, and rode ina 
chariot decorated with the dragon and phoenix, and offered sacrifices after the 
manner of an emperor in the north and south suburbs. Also he appointed the 
daughter of Feng Fang his Empress and his son Heir Apparent, and he pressed for 
the early wedding of Lu Bu's daughter with his son so that the palace entourage 
might be complete. 


But when Yuan Shu heard of the fate of his marriage ambassador, Han Yin, who 
was sent to the capital and was executed, Yuan Shu was very angry and began at 
once to plan for revenge. He made Zhang Xun his Grand Commander and gave 
Zhang Xun the command of more than two hundred thousand soldiers with the 
instruction to invade Xuzhou. The army consisted of seven divisions under seven 
commanders: Zhang Xun led the Center Army; Qiao Rui, the First Left Army; Lei Bo, 
the Second Left Army; Han Xian, the Third Left Army; Chen Ji, First Right Army; 
Chen Lan, Second Right Army; and Yang Feng, the Third Right Army. Each 
commander was instructed to make a certain town his objective. 


The Imperial Protector of Yangzhou, Jin Shang, was ordered to superintend the 
commissariat, but he declined the office. And so Yuan Shu put Jin Shang to death. 
Ji Ling was in command of the reserves to help wherever he was required. Yuan 
Shu led thirty thousand troops, and he appointed three generals, Li Feng, Liang 
Gang, and Yue Jiu, to go up and down and coordinate the grand march. 


Lu Bu found out from his scouts that his own Xuzhou City was the objective of 
Zhang Xun; the other towns to be first attacked being Xiaopei, Yidu, Langye, Jieshi, 
Xiapi, and Junshan. The invading armies were marching twenty miles a day, and 
plundering the countryside as they advanced. 


Lu Bu summoned his advisers to a council to which came Chen Gong, Chen 
Deng, and Chen Gui. When all had assembled Chen Gong said, "This misfortune 
that has come to us is due to the two Chens, who fawned upon the central 
government in order to obtain rank and appointments. Now remove the evil by 
putting these two to death and sending their heads to Yuan Shu. Then he will retire 
and leave us in peace." 


Lu Bu acquiesced and had the two arrested. But the son, Chen Deng, only 
laughed, saying, "What is this anxiety about? These seven armies are no more to 
me than so many heaps of rotting straw. They are not worth thinking about." 


"If you can show us how to overcome them, | will spare your life," said Lu Bu. 


"General, if you will listen to poor me, the region will be perfectly safe." 
"Let us hear what you have to say." 


"Yuan Shu's troops are numerous but they are only a flock of crows; they are not 
an army under a leader. There is no mutual confidence. | can keep them at bay with 
the ordinary guards of the place and could overcome them by some unsuspected 
stratagem. If | should fail, | have another plan by which | can not only protect the 
region but capture our enemy." 


"Let us have it." 


Chen Deng said, "Han Xian and Yang Feng, two of the leaders of our enemies, 
are old servants of the Han Dynasty who fled from fear of Cao Cao and, being 
homeless, sought refuge with Yuan Shu. He despises them, and they are 
dissatisfied with his service. A little letter from the court will Secure their help as our 
allies, and with Liu Bei to help us on the outside, we can certainly overcome Yuan 
Shu." 


"You shall take the letters yourself," said Lu Bu. 


Chen Deng agreed, and a memorial detailing his intentions was sent to the 
capital, letters to Yuzhou to Liu Bei, and finally Chen Deng was sent, with a small 
escort, to wait for Han Xian on the road to Xiapi. 


When Han Xian's army had halted and pitched camp, Chen Deng went to see 
Han Xian who said, "What are you here for? You belong to Lu Bu." 


"lam a noble of the court of the great Hans. Why do you call me a Lu Bu's man? 
If you, General, hitherto a minister of state, now serve a traitor, you will nullify the 
grand services you rendered in protecting the Emperor in the flight from Changan. 
Beside, the suspicious Yuan Shu will assuredly do you some harm, and you will 
regret not having taken this opportunity to work against him." 


Han Xian sighed, saying, "| would return to my allegiance if there should be any 
opportunity." 


Thereupon Chen Deng gave him Lu Bu's letter asking for cooperation. Han Xian 
read it and said, "Yes; | know. You may return to your master and say General Yang 
Feng and | will turn our weapons and smite Yuan Shu. Look out for a signal flare, 
and let your master come to our aid." 


As soon as Chen Deng had got back and reported his success, Lu Bu divided 
his troops into five divisions, each of ten thousand, and sent them to five threatened 
towns to meet his enemies. Gao Shun led one army to Xiaopei against Qiao Rui; 
Chen Gong to Yidu against Chen Ji; Zhang Liao and Zang Ba to Langye against 


Lei Bo; Song Xian and Wei Xu to Jieshi against Chen Lan. Lu Bu himself led 
against the main body under Zhang Xun, leaving a small guard in Xuzhou City. 


Lu Bu camped ten miles from the walls. When the enemy came up, Zhang Xun 
thought Lu Bu too strong to attack with the force he had, so he retired seven miles 
to await reinforcements. 


That night, in the second watch, Han Xian and Yang Feng arrived, and soon the 
flare was lighted as arranged. Lu Bu's troops were admitted to the camp and 
caused great confusion. Then Lu Bu gave a full attack, and Zhang Xun was routed 
and fled. Lu Bu pursued till daylight, when he fell in with one of the other bodies led 
by Ji Ling. Both sides faced each other; but at the very beginning of the 
engagement Yang Feng and Han Xian also attacked, and Ji Ling was forced to fly. 


Lu Bu went in pursuit but soon another force came out from the rear of some 
hills. These looked very imposing. As the ranks opened Lu Bu saw a leader's guard 
with flags bearing dragons and phoenixes and representations of the sun and 
moon, the stars in the four groups of the Great Bear Constellation, the five 
directions of the Earth, golden gourds, silver axes, yellow halberds, white yaks' 
tails, all imperial emblems. And beneath a yellow silken parasol sat Yuan Shu on 
horseback, clad in silver mail with a sword handle showing at each wrist. 


Standing out in front of the array, Yuan Shu railed at his opponent calling him 
traitor and bastard. Lu Bu said nothing but rode forward ready for battle, and Li 
Feng, one of Yuan Shu's leaders, advanced to take the challenge. They met, but at 
the third bout, Li Feng was wounded in the hand, whereupon his spear fell to the 
ground, and he fled. Lu Bu waved on the advance and his men prevailed. The 
other side fled, leaving much spoil, clothing, mail, and horses. 


Yuan Shu's defeated troops had not gone far when a strong army, led by Guan 
Yu, appeared barring his way. 


"Traitor! Why have they not slain you?" cried Guan Yu. 


Whereat Yuan Shu fled in great trepidation, and his army melted into fugitives in 
all directions. The new army fell upon them with great slaughter. Yuan Shu and the 
remnant of his army retreated into the below regions of River Huai. 


Victory being now secure, Lu Bu, in company with Guan Yu, Yang Feng, and 
Han Xian returned to Xuzhou, where there were banquets and feasting and 
rewards for the soldiers and generals of five divisions. These over, Guan Yu took 
his leave and returned to Yuzhou, while Han Xian was appointed Governor of Yidu, 
and Yang Feng Governor of Langye. 


There had been a question of keeping these two in Xuzhou City, but Chen Gui 
opposed it, saying, "Let them hold those places in Huashang Mountains, which will 


be all yours within a year." 


So Han Xian and Yang Feng were sent to these two cities in the meantime to 
await orders. 


"Why not retain them here?" asked Chen Deng secretly of his father. "They 
would be a basis for our conspiracy against Lu Bu." 


"But if they helped him, on the other hand, we should lengthen the tiger's claws 
and teeth," said Chen Gui. 


So Chen Deng could only approve of his father's precautions. 


Yuan Shu returned home burning to avenge his defeat, so he sent to the South 
Land to ask a loan of troops from Sun Ce. But Sun Ce said, "On the strength of 
holding the State Seal, he secretly calls himself emperor and rebels against the 
Hans. | would rather punish such a renegade than help him." 


So Sun Ce refused. The letter refusing help added to Yuan Shu's anger. 


"What next from this callow youth?" cried Yuan Shu. "I will smite him before | 
deal with the others." 


But his adviser, Yang Dajiang, dissuaded him from this course. 


Having refused help to his powerful rival, Sun Ce thought it wise to take 
measures for his own safety. So he stationed an army at Jiangkou. Soon after came 
a messenger from Cao Cao bearing Sun Ce's appointment as Governor of Kuaiji 
with orders to raise an army and reduce Yuan Shu. 


Sun Ce was inclined to carry out these orders, but he called a council at which 
Zhang Zhao opposed this course. 


Said he, "Although recently defeated, Yuan Shu has large army and ample 
supplies. He is not to be attacked lightly. You would better write to Cao Cao 
persuading him to attack the South of River Huai and we will be auxiliaries. 
Between the two armies, Yuan Shu must certainly be defeated. If by the remotest 
chance we lose, we have Cao Cao to come to our rescue." 


This plan was adopted and a messenger was sent to lay it before Cao Cao. In 
the meantime, after the defeat at River Yu, Cao Cao had reached Xuchang where 
his first thought was to institute sacrifices to his beloved lost leader, Dian Wei. He 
conferred rank upon his son Dian Man and took him into his own palace to be 
cared for. 


Presently arrived Sun Ce's messenger with letters, and next came a report that 


Yuan Shu, being short of food, had made a raid on Chenliu. Cao Cao thought the 
moment opportune, so he issued orders for the south expedition, leaving Cao Ren 
to hold the capital. The army marched, horse and foot, one hundred seventy 
thousand, with commissariat wagons of food to the number of over a thousand. 
Messages were sent to summon Sun Ce, Liu Bei, and Lu Bu. 


Liu Bei was the first to welcome the grand army at his Yuzhou borders, and he 
was Called in to the Prime Minister's tent. After the usual salutations, two human 
heads were produced by Liu Bei. 


"Whose are these?" asked Cao Cao in surprise. 
"The heads of Han Xian and Yang Feng." 
"Why did this happen?" 


"They were sent to control Yidu and Langye, but they allowed their soldiers to 
plunder the people. Bitter complaints arose, so | invited them to a banquet and my 
brothers dispatched them when | gave the signal by dropping a cup. Their armies 
gave in at once. Now | have to apologize for my fault." 


"You have removed an evil, which is a grand service: why talk of a fault?" 
And Cao Cao praised Liu Bei's action. 


When the joint army reached Lu Bu's Xuzhou borders, he came to meet it. Cao 
Cao spoke graciously to him and conferred upon him the title of General of the Left 
Army, promising him an official seal as soon as he returned to the capital. Lu Bu 
was very pleased. 


Then the three armies were made into one force, Cao Cao being in the center, 
Lu Bu to the left wing, and Liu Bei to the right wing. Xiahou Dun and Yu Jin were 
Leaders of the Van. 


On Yuan Shu's side, General Qiao Rui with fifty thousand troops was appointed 
Van Leader. The armies met on the confines of the city of Shouchun. Qiao Rui and 
Xiahou Dun rode out and opened battle. But Qiao Rui fell in the third bout, and his 
troops fled into the city. 


Then came news that Sun Ce's fleet was near and would attack on the west. The 
other three land corps took each one face-~-Cao Cao on the north, Lu Bu on the 
east, and Liu Bei on the south. The city of Shouchun was in a parlous state. 


At this juncture Yuan Shu summoned his officers. Yang Dajiang explained the 
case, "Shouchun has suffered from drought for several years and the people are on 
the verge of famine. Sending an army would add to the distress and anger the 


people, and victory would be uncertain. | advise not to send any more soldiers 
there, but to hold on till the besiegers are conquered by lack of supplies. 
Meanwhile, Your Highness, with regiment of guards, will move over to the other 
side of River Huai, which is quite ready, and we shall also escape the enemy's 
ferocity." 


So due arrangements was made. One hundred thousand troops under Li Feng, 
Yue Jiu, Liang Gang, and Chen Ji were appointed to guard Shouchun. Then a 
general move was made to the other side of the River Huai. Not only the remained 
army went over, but all the accumulated wealth of the Yuan family, gold and silver, 
jewels and precious stones, were moved also. 


Cao Cao's army of one hundred seventy thousand needed daily no 
inconsiderable quantity of food; and as the country around had been famine- 
stricken for several years, nothing could be got there. So he tried to hasten the 
military operations and capture the city. On the other hand, the defenders knew the 
value of delay and simply held on. After a month's vigorous siege, the fall of 
Shouchun seemed as far off as it was at first, and supplies were very short. Letters 
were sent to Sun Ce who sent a hundred thousand carts of grain. When the usual 
distribution became impossible, the Chief of the Commissariat, Ren Jun, and the 
Controller of the Granaries, Wang Hou, presented a statement asking what was to 
be done. 


"Serve out with a smaller measure," said Cao Cao. "That will save us for a time." 

"But if the soldiers murmur, what then?" 

"| shall have another device." 

As ordered the controller issued grain in a short measure. Cao Cao sent secretly 
to find out how the army took this; and when he found that complaints were general 
and the soldiers were saying that the Prime Minister was fooling them, he sent a 
secret summons to the controller. When Wang Hou came, Cao Cao said, "! want to 
ask you to lend me something to pacify the soldiers with. You must not refuse." 

"What does the Prime Minister wish?" 

"| want the loan of your head to expose to the soldiery." 

"But | have done nothing wrong!" exclaimed the unhappy man. 

"| know that, but if | do not put you to death there will be a mutiny. After you are 
gone, your wife and children shall be my care. So you need not grieve on their 


account." 


Wang Hou was about to remonstrate further, but Cao Cao gave a signal. The 


executioners hustled Wang Hou out, and he was beheaded. His head was 
exposed on a tall pole, and a notice said, "In accordance with military law, Wang 
Hou had been put to death for peculation and the use of a short measure in issuing 
grain." 


This appeased the discontent. Next followed a general order threatening death 
to all commanders if the city was not taken within three days. Cao Cao in person 
went up to the very walls to superintend the work of filling up the moat. The 
defenders kept up constant showers of stones and arrows. Two inferior officers, 
who left their stations in fear, were slain by Cao Cao himself. Thereafter he went on 
foot to work with his soldiers and to see that work went on continuously and no one 
dared be a laggard. Thus encouraged, the army became invincible, and no 
defense could withstand their onslaught. In a very short time the walls were scaled, 
the gates battered in, and the besiegers were in possession. The officers of the 
garrison-~-Li Feng, Yue Jiu, Liang Gang, and Chen Ji-~-were captured alive and 
were executed in the market place. All the paraphernalia of imperial state were 
burned, and the whole city wrecked. 


When the question of crossing the river in pursuit of Yuan Shu came up, Xun Yu 
opposed it, saying, "The country has suffered from short crops for years, and we 
should be unable to get grain. An advance would weary the army, harm the people, 
and possibly end in disaster. | advise a return to the capital to wait there till the 
spring wheat shall have been harvested and we have plenty of food." 


Cao Cao hesitated; and before he had made up his mind, there came an urgent 
message: "Zhang Xiu, with the support of Liu Biao, was ravaging the country all 
round. There were rebellions in Nanyang and Jiangling, and Cao Hong could not 
cope with it. Cao Hong had been worsted already in several engagements and 
was in sore straits." 


Cao Cao at once wrote to Sun Ce to command the Great River so as to prevent 
any move on the part of Liu Biao, while he prepared his army to go to deal with 
Zhang Xiu. Before marching Cao Cao directed Liu Bei to station at Xiaopei, as he 
and Lu Bu being as brothers, might help each other. 


When Lu Bu had left for Xuzhou, Cao Cao said secretly to Liu Bei, "| am leaving 
you at Xiaopei to dig a 'pitfall for the tiger.' You will only take advice from Chen 
Deng and Chen Gui, and there can be no mishap. You will find so-and-so your ally 
when needed." 


So Cao Cao marched to Xuchang where he heard that Duan Wei had slain Li 
Jue and Wu Xi killed Guo Si, and they presented the heads of these two. Beside 
the whole clan of Li Jue, more than two hundred, had been arrested and brought to 
the capital. They were all put to death at various gates and their heads exposed as 
warning. The people cheered the end of those two rebels. 


In the Emperor's palace a large number of officials were assembled at a peace 
banquet. The Emperor rewarded the two successful leaders, Duan Wei with the title 
of General Who Destroys Rebellion and Wu Xi General Who Wrecks Villainy, and 
sent to guard Changan. They came to audience to express their gratitude and 
marched away. 


Then Cao Cao sent in a memorial that Zhang Xiu was in rebellion, and an army 
must be sent against him. The Emperor in person arranged the chariot and 
escorted Cao Cao out of the city when he went to take command of the expedition. 
It was the summer, the fourth month of the third year of Rebuilt Tranquillity (AD 
198). Xun Yu was in chief military command in Xuchang. 


The army marched away. In the course of the march they passed through a 
wheat region, and the grain was ready for harvesting but the peasants had fled for 
fear, and the corn was uncut. Cao Cao sent proclamations to all villages and towns: 
"lam sent on the expedition by command of the Emperor to capture a rebel and 
save the people. | cannot avoid moving in the harvest season; but if any one 
trample down the corn, he shall be put to death. Military law is strict without 
exception, and the people need fear no damage." 


The people were very pleased and lined the road, wishing success to the 
expedition. When the soldiers passed wheat fields, they dismounted and pushed 
aside the stalks so that none were trampled down. 


One day, when Cao Cao was riding through the fields, a dove suddenly got up, 
startling the horse so that it swerved into the standing grain, and a large patch was 
trampled down. Cao Cao at once called the Provost Marshal and bade him decree 
the sentence for the crime of trampling down corn. 


"How can | deal with your crime?" asked the Provost Marshal. 

"| made the rule and | have broken it. Can | otherwise satisfy public opinion?" 
Cao Cao laid hold of the sword by his side and made to take his own life. All 
hastened to prevent him, and Guo Jia said, "In ancient days, the days of the Spring 
and Autumn history, the laws were not applied to the persons of the most important. 


You are the supreme leader of a mighty army and must not wound yourself." 


Cao Cao pondered for a long time. At last he said, "Since there exists the reason 
just quoted, | may perhaps escape the death penalty." 


Then with his sword he cut off his hair and threw it on the ground, saying, "I cut 
off the hair as touching the head." 


Then he sent messengers to exhibit the hair throughout the whole army, saying, 
"The Prime Minister, having trodden down some corn, ought to have lost his head 


by the terms of the order; now here is his hair cut off as an attack on the head." 


This deed was a stimulus to discipline all through the army so that not a person 
dared be disobedient. A poet wrote: 


A myriad soldiers march along and all are brave and bold, 
And their myriad inclinations by one leader are controlled. 
That crafty leader shore his locks when forfeit was his head, 
O full of guile were thou, Cao Cao, as every one has said. 


On the first news of the approach of Cao Cao with an army, Zhang Xiu wrote to 
Liu Biao for help. Then Zhang Xiu led out his troops, with his two generals, Lei Xu 
and Zhang Xian. 


When the array was complete Zhang Xiu took his station in front and pointing at 
Cao Cao railed at him, saying, "O false and pretended supporter of benevolence 
and justice! O shameless one! You are just a beast of the forest, and absolutely 
devoid of humanity." 


This annoyed Cao Cao who sent out Xu Chu against the insulter. Zhang Xian 
came to meet him and fell in the third bout. Thence Zhang Xiu's troops fled and 
were pursued to the very walls of Nanyang, only managing to get within just before 
the pursuit came up. The city was then closely besieged. Seeing the moat was so 
wide and deep that approach to the wall would be difficult, Cao Cao's commanders 
began to fill up the ditch with earth. Then with sand bags, brushwood, and bundles 
of grass they built a great mound near the wall and on this erected steps so that 
they could look over into the city. 


Cao Cao rode round the city closely inspecting the defenses. Three days later 
he issued an order to make a mound of earth and brushwood at the northwest 
corner, as he would mount the walls at that point. He was observed from within the 
city by Jia Xu, who went to Zhang Xiu and said, "| know what Cao Cao intends, and 
| can defeat him by a countermove." 


Even amongst the very foremost 
There is one who leads the way; 
Some one sees through your devices, 

Be as crafty as ye may. 


What the counter-move was will be told in the next chapter. 


Three Kingdoms -~- Chapter 18: 
Giving Counsels, Jia Xu Directs A Great Victory; 
Braving Battlefield, Xiahou Dun Loses An Eye. 


Jia Xu, as he had guessed the enemy's intention, had also devised a countermove. 
So he went to his chief and said, "| saw Cao Cao very carefully reconnoitering 
round about the city. He certainly noticed that the southeast corner of the wall had 
been lately restored with mud bricks of a different kind, and that the fencing barrier 
is badly out of repair. He will try to effect an entrance there. Wherefore he is making 
a feint attack at the opposite point. He is piling up straw and making ostentatious 
preparations whereby to cajole us into withdrawing from the real point of attack to 
defend the northwest. His troops will scale the walls in the darkness and try to enter 
at the southeast." 


"Supposing your surmise correct, what do you advise?" asked Zhang Xiu. 


"The countermove is plain. You issue an order for our best and bravest soldiers 
to fill their bellies, to take only the lightest outfit and conceal themselves in the 
houses near the southeast corner. Then disguise the townspeople as soldiers and 
send them to pretend to defend the northwest. Tonight we will let the enemy climb 
up the walls and enter the city and, once they are fairly within, give the signal and 
the concealed soldiers will rush out upon them. We may even capture Cao Cao 
himself." 


The stratagem was decided upon. Soon the scouts told Cao Cao: "The 
defenders of the city have moved to the northwest where noisy preparations for 
defense are going on. The opposite corner is left undefended." 


"They have fallen into my trap!" said Cao Cao gleefully. 


He ordered his troops to prepare shovels and hooks and all the gear needed for 


scaling walls, and all day they kept up the attack on the northwest angle. 
